# UD QPs

<!-- id=102236189 parent=32211017 -->

This document describes detail about UD (Unreliable Datagram) QPs.

As UD QP allows one-to-many connection rather than a point-to-point manner (e.g., RC), UD transport type may be used in larger-scale scenarios. However, UD neither supports (1) RDMA operation (e.g., read / write) nor supports (2) payload size exceeding MTU.

To enable one-to-many connection, UD packets must be supplied with (1) destination address, (2) destination QP, and (2) destination QKey. Here, destination QP and destination QKey is directly provided in the work request (see `struct ib_ud_wr` in linux source tree for more detail).

Destination address can be fetched through `struct ib_ah` (address handle, which describes the address of remote node). `rdma_create_ah` function will pass the `struct ib_ah` to the device driver, and it will pack address metadata (e.g., destination mac, ip, etc) to vendor-specific address vector structure (e.g., `struct mb_av` ).

<div>

<div>

Note that the structure which actually contains address information is address vector.

Once the address vector is created, the pointer to corresponding address vector is stored in address handler.

</div>

</div>

For UD work request, `struct ib_ah` is included. By doing so, the driver can get corresponding destination address and pass it to the hardware by pointer to the address vector structure.

<div>

<div>

SW needs to provide address handler in the work request everytime it tries to post WQE to UD QP (since UD QPs can transfer data to arbitrary UD QPs). Meanwhile, this process is not required for RC type packets - when RC type QP transits its state from INIT to RTR, the address vector must be given (= one time).

In our RDMA IP, during the INIT → RTR stage (=modify qp), the driver pass the address information to the hardware, and it is stored in FPGA memory.

</div>

</div>

In summary, you need;

- Destination MAC address

- Destination IP address

  - This will be filled in ETH/IP header.

- Destination QP

  - This will be filled in BTH header.

- Source QP

  - This will be filled in DETH header.

- Destination Qkey

  - This will be field in DETH header. Will be used in authentication process at the responder side.

  - Note that QKey will be GSI_QKEY (if GSI QP) or work-request provided values (e.g., 32’h1111_1111 in case of perftest).

Below is packet validation process of UD QPs.

<div>

<div>

<div>

Packet validation in UD

</div>

</div>

</div>

For UD packet, it checks;

- Opcode:

  - Since the payload size is limited to MTU size, the opcode should be either SEND_ONLY or SEND_ONLY_WITH_IMM.

  - If not, silently drop packet.

- Resource availability

  - Responder checks the availability of receive queue, just like rnr case.

  - If RNR, then sliently drop packet.

- Authentication

  - Responer compares incoming QKey with target QP’s QKey.

  - If differs, change receive queue to err state.

Below is packet validation for RC, just for reference.

Validation process (RC)

<div>

<div>

Packet validation in RC

</div>

</div>
