# RoCEv2 ECN in detail

<!-- id=106463465 parent=76644711 -->

# Overview

**Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN)** was initially defined as an extension of TCP-IP protocol ([RFC 3168](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3168) for more details), in order to inform the endpoints of an “explicit” detection of the congestion in network switches. The switches may mark Congestion Experienced (CE) inside a packet in a case of congestion, so the receiver to detect and react appropriately, rather than the endpoint relying on the “implicit” signals of congestion such as packet drop.

ECN consists of two separate modifications on different layers of network hierarchy as following (*I’m not sure whether the terminology ECN includes the both side or only the Network Layer side, but the concepts of both things were described at least in the specification above*).

- Detection and indication of the congestion in the **Network Layer**

- Reaction to the signal of the congestion in the **Transport Layer** (Application Layer might be involved together, depending on the way of implementation)

The RoCEv2 Congestion Management (RCM) is defined to use ECN protocol (see the [specification](https://enterprise-support.nvidia.com/s/article/understanding-rocev2-congestion-management) for more details). The detection mechanism of RoCEv2 ECN is exactly the same as that of TCP-IP ECN, where the reaction mechanism of each differs from other one.

# Network Layer behavior

To carry an information about congestion experience, 2-bit-wide ECN field is introduced in the IP header. The value of this field is initialized by the packet sender. During its transmission, the IP switch may “mark” this field to notify the receiver that there was a congestion. The meaning and the expected behavior for each value of ECN field is described below:

<div>

</div>

- **00** (**Not-ECT**, Not ECN-Capable Transport): Initialized by a sender. A packet with this ECN field indicates that the sender of this packet does not support ECN, or, does not desire to track this one even if ECN is supported. The IP switch will never modify the ECN field of this value into other ones, regardless of its capability of supporting ECN.

- **01**, **10** (**ECT**, ECN-Capable Transport): Initialized by a sender. A packet with this field is expected to get notified about the occurrence of congestion during its transmission. The ECN-capable IP switch may change the value of this field into 11 in case of congestion. Two values 01 and 10 are interchangeable; the responses to ECN field 01 / 10 of the switches or NICs are *functionally* identical. (*There could be an attempt to treat 01 and 10 with different algorithms in the future, but not yet to the best of my knowledge.*)

- **11** (**CE**, Congestion Experienced): This value can only be written by ECN-capable switch. If an ECN-capable switch is to process an ECT-marked incoming packet during congestion, then it could (but not guaranteed to) modify the ECN field of that packet into CE and forward it, instead of dropping that packet.

Note that there could be endpoints and switches with/without ECN capability. The ECN implementation of any NICs must be capable of dealing with all scenarios; *e.g. communicating with ECN-capable/not capable peer, ECT-marked packet has been dropped in the network, …*

# Transport Layer behavior of RoCEv2 ECN

After the receiver side endpoint receives any valid packet with CE marked in ECN field, it notices a congestion and sends feedback to the sender side. RoCEv2 utilizes an explicit packet named **Congestion Notification Packet (CNP)** for this. The format of CNP is shown in the figure below.

<div>

</div>

Here are the [specifications](https://enterprise-support.nvidia.com/s/article/understanding-rocev2-congestion-management#jive_content_id_Explicit_Congestion_Notification_ECN) those are related to the reaction of sender - receiver pair after CE detection:

- When <u>receiving a valid RoCEv2 packet with a value of ’11 in its IP.ECN field</u>, the HCA shall **generate a RoCEv2 CNP** directed to the source of the received packet. The HCA may choose to send a single CNP for multiple such ECN marked packets on a given QP.

  - (From the spec) To avoid load due to traffic generation, the receiving end station should aggregate Congestion Notification for each injector (QP). One CN packet is sent to the injector once in x microseconds.

  - *(From* [*DCQCN paper*](https://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2015/pdf/papers/p523.pdf)*) The paper follows such rule by implementing its CNP generation logic as a figure shown below.*

<div>

</div>

- When <u>receiving a RoCEv2 CNP</u>, the HCA shall **reduce the rate of injection** for the QP indicated in the RoCEv2 CNP (The amount of rate change is determined by a configurable rate reduction parameter).

- The HCA should **increase the injection rate** on a QP when a configurable amount of <u>elapsed time</u> and/or a configurable <u>number of bytes</u> have been transmitted on that QP since the reception of the most recent RoCEv2 CNP for that QP.

- The ECN bits in the (CNP) packet are set to ‘01’ to verify that the packet is not dropped by the IP routers.

- The CNP packet arrives to the injecting end station. The injecting end station filters the packet with ECN bits ‘01’ and the RoCE packet and applies the corresponding rate limiter to that flow.

To sum up, in our IP’s perspective, (1) responder should support CE detection → CNP generation coalescing → CNP transmission and (2) there should be a packet injection rate control logic that responds to the incoming CNP packets.

It seems that the rate control logic is *arbitrary*; the specification, even one from IBTA, does not specify any quantitative information of the logic. (*e.g. the amount of injection rate drop after CNP received, recovery time or recovery bytes since last CNP arrived, …*)

# Comparing RoCEv2 ECN with TCP-IP ECN

Since RoCEv2 shares Ethernet as its Network (and Link) Layer implementation with TCP-IP, there are no differences between those two in terms of the switch’s congestion detection. Here I describe the existing difference between two protocols with two main perspectives; feedback from the receiver to the sender and the sender’s response (mainly the rate control).

1.  **The feedback route of the congestion notification from the receiver to the sender**

While ECN-capable RoCEv2 endpoint generates an explicit CNP when a congestion detected, TCP-IP includes such information into the TCP header of returning ACK packet. Once the receiver detects CE-marked packet, it starts to mark **ECN-Echo (ECE) bit in the TCP headers** of all subsequent ACK packets. This lasts until the receiver acknowledges the completion of sender’s injection rate control. (The way of notification by the sender will be discussed below.)

The current TCP-IP protocol forces any pure ACK packets to have Not-ECT value in their ECN fields. It means that TCP-IP cannot provide congestion detection for receiver → sender ACK path. However, the current RoCEv2 protocol from [NVIDIA](https://enterprise-support.nvidia.com/s/article/understanding-rocev2-congestion-management#jive_content_id_Explicit_Congestion_Notification_ECN) sets the ECN field of every CNP to 01; it could be marked with CE during its flight.

2.  **The sender’s explicit acknowledgement of receiving a feedback**

In RoCEv2, the sender is not expected to transmit any explicit signal of “CNP received” but just respond to it internally by adjusting the packet injection rate of itself. On the other hand, TCP header has another one bit named **Congestion Window Reduced (CWR)** to explicitly acknowledge the peer that it got an ECE signal. Unlike ECE, CWR is <u>set only once</u> to the very first packet since the ECE handled.

Once the receiver sets ECE, it marks all ACK packets from it with ECE until it notices CWR flag from its peer. Thus, combining with 1, even if some of the receiver’s ECE-marked ACK packets have been lost in the network, the ECE signal will be eventually passed to the sender. In contrast, the missing of sender’s packet with CWR may cause redundant rate cut of the sender. In order to avoid such possibility as much as possible, TCP endpoints do not respond to ECEs more than once per a Round-Trip Time (RTT).

*So in my opinion, the mutual notification system of TCP-IP ECE is built potentially less efficient but more robust than that of RoCEv2.*

3.  **Injection rate control - Algorithm**

As mentioned above, RoCEv2’s response for CNP must be **packet injection rate management**. However there are no any concrete *rules* in detail; *most things seem to be arbitrary.*

TCP already has its own CC logic based on the **congestion window (cwnd)**, which limits the amount of maximum in-flight packets held by the sender. Almost all well-known TCP CC algorithms (slow start, congestion avoidance, fast retransmit / recovery, …) are being operated by <u>adjusting the size of cwnd depending on the current situation</u>. TCP-IP ECN is not an exception; if a sender detects ECE, it reduces the size of cwnd as similar when its timer expires or it receives duplicate ACKs. Typically (*but not necessarily*) the cwnd size is cut down by an half. Note that the adjustments done by an ECN algorithm will be shared with those done by other existing CC algorithms.

*Again, the specifications of both protocols only provide some rough guidelines. The exact algorithm in detail seems to be highly vendor-specific. I think achieving a performance with satisfaction while just obeying the specifications will be enough.*

4.  **Injection rate control - Implementation**

The way of implementation for RoCEv2 ECN (*e.g. Among HW and SW, which must be in charge of calculating the updated injection rate? …*) should be decided from the scratch.

The vast majority of ECN-capable TCP-IP endpoint has its rate adjustment logic <u>within SW</u>. It is because the reaction of CC occurs mainly in Transport Layer, which is a SW part in TCP-IP protocol in general. Only few of the outliers with special NICs (*e.g. TOE*) offload their CC logic into HW.

# TODO lists for development

- Survey on how other RNICs (Xilinx ERNIC, Mellanox, Broadcom, …) implement their RoCEv2 ECN logics

- New testbench for CC functionalities

- IP implementation

- Survey on IBTA’s compliance / interoperability test scheme for ECN

Considering some existing vendors’ implementation methods described below, I think the contents and efforts for development may vary with a wide range depending on the <u>difficulty of the compliance test</u>. For example, if the test was turned out to be simple enough (*i.e. just check whether the device sends/receives CNP and cut rates regardless of the ratio*), then everything may be done within our HW without any advanced inventions. Otherwise, we may need more amount of concerns, including the design of rate control module, congestion control experiments with CX, etc.

# Other RNIC vendor’s RoCEv2 ECN implementation

1.  **Xilinx ERNIC** ([reference](https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg332-ernic/ERNIC-RX-Path))

- CNP generation

  - If CE-marked packet arrives to certain QP, it invokes an interrupt to the driver

  - The driver generates CNP and then notifies QP manager

  - QP manager forwards CNP into QP#1, regardless of the source QP which detected CE

  - QP#1 transmits CNP to the original sender of CE

- Rate adjustment

  - Once CNP has arrived into certain QP, it notifies QP manager

  - QP manager responds to it by cutting down the \# of maximum outstanding WQEs of that QP

  - Until the rate recovery (*no details about recovery algorithm*), any redundant CNPs will be ignored

- Discussions

  - According to the [document](https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg332-ernic/QP-Manager), QP Manager is a **HW** infrastructure that maintains and supplies QP metadata / outstanding WQEs / QP pointers. It seems that this module is also responsible for conducting rate cuts and recoveries.

  - As we can see above, the rate adjustment path seems to run entirely within HW but the CNP generation path does not. *Why it needs a driver engagement?* (*Although it manages all QPs, so the required information will be accessible*)

  - One notable thing is that the RNIC always forwards all CNP into a single dedicated QP. Also it has some kind of simple logic for rate adjustment without any disclosure of the internal algorithm.

2.  **ConnectX** (reference [\[1\]](https://enterprise-support.nvidia.com/s/article/howto-configure-roce-with-ecn-end-to-end-using-connectx-4-and-spectrum--trust-l2-x) [\[2\]](https://enterprise-support.nvidia.com/s/article/howto-configure-dcqcn--roce-cc--values-for-connectx-4--linux-x), mainly focused on CX-4)

- CNP generation

  - Like ERNIC, CX generates CNP in case of the notification of congestion. Not only when it detects incoming CE-marked packets, it may also respond to implicit packet drops. These procedures are known to be conducted solely in HW.

  - By parameter setting, we can configure the priorities for sending each type of packet. NVIDIA’s recommendation seems to be CNP \> RDMA \> TCP (*though it’s quite obvious*). CX provides two Notification Point-side counters for debugging and those are “# of CNPs sent successfully” and “# of RoCEv2 CE-marked packets received.”

  - The Notification Point’s responding interval (that is, even if more than one CE-marked packets come in as a stream, CNP will not generated more than once within such interval) is also a user-configurable parameter.

- Rate adjustment

  - We can choose to enable or disable ECN-based CC. In a case which ECN is being enabled, CX provides the injection rate management based on DCQCN by default. For the Reaction Point-side, CX also supports three counters for debugging; “current \# of rate-limited flows,” “# of received but ignored CNPs,” and “# of received and handled CNPs.”

  - As well as packet priorities, almost all parameters for DCQCN rate update algorithm are configurable. Parameters are initially set up by the user and sent to the HW via the driver.

  - It seems that the SW stack does not participate in calculating new injection rate and controlling the port with that rate. (The only moment with SW is the initial parameter passing)

- Discussions

  - I could not get any specific details about the “exact” workflow of CX’s CNP generation path, new rate calculation, etc. In my opinion, the majority of the implementation is offloaded to the HW.

3.  **Broadcom RNIC** ([reference](https://techdocs.broadcom.com/us/en/storage-and-ethernet-connectivity/ethernet-nic-controllers/bcm957xxx/adapters/Configuration-adapter/RoCE/advanced-network-configuration/congestion-control1.html))

- Comparison against CX

  - The depth of the information I could get from Broadcom’s documentation was similar to that of CX. It can be configured to turn on/off ECN, choose DCQCN-D/P as the rate control algorithm, and adjust the parameters for DCQCN.

  - Like CX, Broadcom also supports custom priority setting for different types of packets.

# Survey on CX’s behavior

FYI, the following observations were copied from [related Jira issue](https://mangoboost.atlassian.net/browse/GPUD-319). The experiments were conducted by forcing MB’s RNIC to transmit request / ACK packets with CE set on ECN field.

- (If CX driver is configured to enable ECN,) CX always send packets with ECN field ‘10’. This includes all requests, all ACK/NAKs, and even CNPs.

- In case of CE-marked packets to “stream” in, CX does not send CNPs with respect to all of them. It seems that CX performs some kind of coalescing for CNP generation.

- Working as a server, CX responds to (=generates CNP) all “valid” CE-marked packets of any kinds of opcode.

- Working as a client, CX responds only to incoming CE-marked read response packets. It did not send any CNPs in case of receiving pure ACKs marked with CE.
