# Memory Management

<!-- id=111706815 parent=32211017 -->

The Infiniband specification provides a Verbs list \[Table 97\]. Some of them are mandatory and others are required only if the corresponding extension is supported. This document focuses on the memory management part and explains the subjects to understand memory management mandatory verbs and base memory management extensions. It also summarizes what our hardware/software already support and what we need more to fully support the mandatory verbs and extensions.

Reference : Infiniband Architecture Specification 1.7, rdma-core (user driver - rxe, mlx5), linux (kernel driver - rxe, mlx5), <http://rdmaconsortium.org/home/RNIC_Verbs_Overview2.pdf>

<div>

<div>

1

</div>

<div>

3

</div>

<div>

false

</div>

<div>

none

</div>

<div>

list

</div>

<div>

true

</div>

</div>

## Intro

### Memory Management Verbs

1.  Memory Region

    1.  Register Memory Region

    2.  Register **Shared Memory Region**

    3.  Register **Physical Memory Region**

    4.  Query Memory Region

    5.  **Reregister** Memory Region

    6.  Reregister Physical Memory Region

    7.  Deregister Memory Region

2.  **Memory Window**

    1.  Allocate Memory Window

    2.  Query Memory Window

    3.  **Bind** Memory Window

    4.  *Post Send* Bind Memory Window

    5.  Deallocate Memory Window

3.  If Base Memory Management Extensions are supported

    1.  **Allocate L_Key**

    2.  *Post Send* Register Non-Shared MR (**Fast Register Physical MR**)

    3.  *Post Send* **Local Invalidate** WR

### Glossary

#### Host Channel Adapter (HCA)

- Device that terminates a link and executes transport-level functions.

- Host side RNIC

#### Channel Interface vs. Consumer

- Consumer (Verbs consumer) : The direct user of the Verbs; In some instances the Verb Consumer may be a OS kernel thread, in others a user-level application, and in still others, some special, privileged process

- Channel Interface (CI) : The presentation of the channel to the Verbs Consumer as implemented through the combination of the Host Channel Adapter, associated firmware, and device driver software. A Verb is an operation which a CI is expected to be able to perform.

- Consumer - application, CI - driver ~ hardware

<div>

</div>

## Summary table

Below is the summarization table for behaviors of each component.

|                                  |                                                                                         |                                                                                  |                       |                                      |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------------|
|                                  | **Type 1 Memory window**                                                                | **Type 2B Memory window**                                                        | **Normal MR**         | **Fast memory registration**         |
| Local invalidation               | Not allowed                                                                             | Allowed (only via QP on which MW was bound)                                      | Not allowed           | Allowed                              |
| Remote invalidation              | Not allowed                                                                             | Allowed (only via QP on which MW was bound)                                      | Not allowed           | Allowed                              |
| Can we validate in user-space?   | Yes                                                                                     | Yes                                                                              | Yes                   | **No**                               |
| Can we validate in kernel-space? | No (no relevant APIs)                                                                   | Yes                                                                              | No (no relevant APIs) | Yes                                  |
| How to allocate?                 | ibv_alloc_mw → ibv_bind_mw                                                              | ibv_alloc_mw → Post work request                                                 | ibv_reg_mr            | **ib**\_alloc_mr → Post work request |
| How to deallocate?               | ibv_bind_mw with zero-length (go to free state) or ibv_dealloc_mw (go to invalid state) | Local/remote invalidation or ibv_dealloc_mw (go to invalid state for both cases) | ibv_dereg_mr          | Local/remote invalidation            |
| Re-registration?                 | Yes                                                                                     | No (need to invalidate in advance)                                               | Yes (ibv_rereg_mr)    | Maybe no?                            |

- Need to check the validity of below sequences

  - ibv_alloc_mw → ibv_dealloc_mw → ibv_bind_mw

    - Type 1

  - ibv_alloc_mw → ibv_bind_mw(zero-length) → ibv_bind_mw

    - Type 1

  - ibv_alloc_mw → local/remote invalidation → bind work request

    - Type 2

  - ibv_alloc_mw → ibv_dealloc_mw → bind work request

    - Type 2

- Should we implement rereg_mr verbs?

  - If so, what can be changed? rkey? pd? protection flags?

## Mandatory Verbs

### Memory Region

#### Shared Memory Region

A Shared Memory Region has a valid Memory Registration that is associated with a set of <u>physical memory locations which are shared</u>. Upon successful ‘Register Shared Memory Region’ verb, the output and input Memory Regions both become Shared Memory Region. The Virtual Address, Protection Domain, and Access Rights specified for the new Memory Region need not be the same as those of the existing Memory Region.

**o10-36.2.5:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the CI must return an <u>error if a</u> <u>Shared Memory Region</u> is used as an input modifier for the <u>Fast Register Physical MR or Local Invalidate</u>.

- Code reference

  - No reference from libibverbs, mlx5, rxe

- Hardware support

  - <div>

    Already support shared MR

    </div>

    w/o considering error handling like **o10-36.2.5** - SW may check error?

  - optimization: Make Shared MRs actually share the Memory Translation Table (MTT) entry (=PA Mem)

#### Physical Memory Region

As an alternative to registering the Consumer’s virtual address space mapped by the processor, the Privileged Consumers can <u>register MR by a list of physically addressed buffers which are already pinned</u>. Since VA is not supplied, RNIC needs a contiguous virtual address space. So the consumer supplies I/O Virtual Address.

There are two types of physically addressed regions;

<div>

VA based I/O Virtual Address

</div>

and Zero based I/O Virtual Address.

- VA based I/O Virtual Address

  - Consumer supplies a requested “I/O Virtual Address” to be associated with the first byte of the Region, which is allowed to begin anywhere within the first physical buffer.

  - The Channel Interface returns the I/O Virtual Address that is actually assigned for the Region.

- Zero based I/O Virtual Address

  - the first byte of the Region, which is allowed to begin anywhere within the first physical buffer, is assigned the address of Zero.

<div>

<div>

:info:

</div>

<div>

atlassian-info

</div>

<div>

\#F4F5F7

</div>

<div>

The Virtual Address in this context is called an “I/O Virtual Address” since it may not be mapped in the processor’s virtual address space, and might be used solely for local or remote accesses performed by the HCA*.*

</div>

</div>

- Hardware support : already supported

  - Actually, the classification between MR and physical MR only resides at the software side (verb layer)

<div>

<div>

:question_mark:

</div>

<div>

atlassian-question_mark

</div>

<div>

:question_mark:

</div>

<div>

\#DEEBFF

</div>

<div>

**MR type and VA to PA translation (hardware details)**

- 위에서 말하는 MR 종류와 우리가 알고 있는 MR type의 관계

  - user application - IB_MR_TYPE_USER : ibv_reg_mr 보면 얘는 physical MR 아님

  - kernel - MEM_REG/DMA? reg_user_mr, reg_user_mr_dmabuf, rereg_user_mr, alloc_mr, map_mr_sg

  - 결론 : MR/physical MR, MR/shared MR 사이의 구분은 SW side에서의 구분이고, 우리가 알고 있는 MR type과는 orthogonal한 개념

- VA to PA translation 기준 잘 정하고 있는가?

  - Our hardware currently supports IB_MR_TYPE_USER, IB_MR_TYPE_MEM_REG, IB_MR_TYPE_DMA

    - MR type is only used to distinguish whether the posted WQE’s scatter/gather address is VA or PA

      - IB_MR_TYPE_USER : VA - translate using Memory Translation Table saved at hardware

      - <div>

        IB_MT_TYPE_MEM_REG

        </div>

        , IB_MR_TYPE_DMA :
        <div>

        PA

        </div>

        \- do not translate given address

  - Actually, the **L_Key** needs to be the criteria to decide whether to translate given sg address or not

    - A Data Segment is defined by a <u>Virtual Address</u>, L_Key and Length. \[10.7.3.2\]

    - A Data Segment referenced through the <u>Reserved L_Key</u> is referenced by a physical address that points to the start of the Data Segment and the length of the Data Segment. \[10.6.4.3.2\]

    - Conclusion from spec : *if L_Key == Reserved L_Key ; use PA; else; use VA;*

  - MEM_REG type example

    - <a href="https://github.com/larrystevenwise/krping" data-card-appearance="inline">https://github.com/larrystevenwise/krping</a> 이거 보면 MEM_REG MR에 dma_addr 넣는것처럼 보임

  - 결론: L_Key가 기준이고 Reserved L_Key만 physical address를 쓰는 것처럼 나와있지만 실제 구현에서는 MEM_REG type MR이 Reserved L_Key를 사용하지 않더라도 WQE에 PA를 쓰는 것 확인

  - 의문 1) MEM_REG type WQE에 PA를 넣는다면 이를 HW가 알고 있어야 하는데, 어디에 명시되어 있는건가?

  - 의문 2) sg_list에 PA가 들어오면 violation check 할 때 SG list searching 해야해서 번거로울 것 같은데..

- IB_MR_TYPE_MEM_REG vs. IB_MR_TYPE_DMA *(italics: 뇌피셜)*

  - Register할 때 실제 할당된 memory buffer의 VA to PA translation table 내림 vs. 내리지 않음

  - Remote에서 접근가능 - w/ VA vs. *Remote 접근 불가능*

  - *할당된 memory buffer에 대해서만 access 가능 → violation check 해야할 것 같음 vs. violation check 안함*

  - WQE’s addr = PA? VA? vs. WQE’s addr = PA

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

#### Registration Verbs (Register MR vs. Shared MR vs. Physical MR)

- Register Memory Region

  - Input : VA, Length, PD, Access Control, type (VA or ZBVA)

  - Output : MR handle, L_Key, R_Key

- Register Shared Memory Region

  - Input : <u>MR handle</u>, VA, PD, Access Control, type (VA or ZBVA)

  - Output : <u>MR handle</u>, VA, L_Key, R_Key

  - Difference

    - Both input/output has MR handle

    - Do not need length input since it will be same as input MR. VA may differ

- Register Physical Memory Region

  - Input : Length, PD, Access Control, type (VA or ZBVA),

    <div>

    PBL

    </div>

    related fields\*, IOVA, Key ownership, offset

  - Output : MR handle,

    <div>

    IOVA

    </div>

    , L_Key, R_Key, Actual size of PBL resources allocated

  - Difference

    - Directly transfer the physical addresses (PBL) instead of VA

      - PBL, physical buffer size, total number of physical buffer

    - Consumer sets IOVA if VA type is VA

    - Key ownership : Consumer can request key ownership for physical memory region (*may be explained later*)

#### Reregister memory region

- Change parameters including access rights, protection domain, registered memory locations for existing Memory Region

  - But resources are expected to be reused if it is possible

- Conceptually performs the functions Deregister Memory Region followed by Register Memory Region

- It is an error for a Consumer to attempt to reregister a Memory Region while the Region still has any Memory Windows bound to it.

- Code reference

  - libibverbs

    - `ibv_rereg_mr` (mr, addr, length, access, pd)

    - supported by mlx5

  - ib_uverbs

    - `ib_rereg_user_mr`

    - supported by sw rxe

      - `rxe_rereg_user_mr` : only supports to modify protection domain, access flags

  - No reference from UCX/NVMeoF

- Hardware support

  - Not supported with single command

  - SW can handle by performing deregister MR followed by register MR

<div>

<div>

:info:

</div>

<div>

atlassian-info

</div>

<div>

\#F4F5F7

</div>

<div>

**Physical Buffer List (PBL)**

<u>The list of starting physical addresses for each physical buffer</u>. Two physical buffer lists are supported: page lists and block lists.

- <u>Page lists</u> used for registration consist of one or more physically contiguous set of memory locations that must <u>start and end on an CI supported page boundary.</u>

  - **C10-53.2.1**: If a page list in a physical memory registration contains an element that does not start and end on a CI-supported page boundary, the CI shall return an error

- **o10-37.2.9**:

  <div>

  Block lists

  </div>

  used for registration consist of one or more physically contiguous set of memory locations that may have an <u>arbitrary byte alignment, but must all be of the same size.</u>

<div>

<div>

**Page list**

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

**Block list**

</div>

</div>

Note that PBL resources are different from PBL.

- PBL : the list of physical addresses of actual physical buffer

- PBL resources : buffer to save PBL

<div>

<div>

PBL vs. PBL resource: rxe example

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

:info:

</div>

<div>

atlassian-info

</div>

<div>

\#F4F5F7

</div>

<div>

**About the Key (L_Key, R_Key)**

**Key state**

<div>

Every key

</div>

has three possible states: invalid, free, valid.

1.  **Invalid state** : No resources have been allocated for the Key. A Key in the Invalid State cannot be used to access host memory. A Key that is in the Invalid State cannot be invalidated

    1.  PD X, PBL resource X, Associated MR X

2.  

    <div>

    Free state

    </div>

    : The Key is not associated with a Memory Region and cannot be used to access host memory. A Key that is in the Free State can be invalidated through a Send with Invalidate. Note: The Free state may not be implemented on Type 1 Memory Windows

    1.  PD O, PBL resource O, Associated MR X

3.  **Valid state** : The Key is associated with a Memory Region. A Key in the Valid State can be used to access host memory. A Key that is in the Valid State can be invalidated through a Send with Invalidate.

    1.  PBL rsrc O, PD O, Associated MR O

- Hardware thinks that invalid state = free state.

<div>

</div>

**Key format & Ownership (BMM)**

**o10-37.2.1:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions defined in this specification, the Key format must consist of:

1.  **24 bit index** in the most significant bits of the L/R_Key, and

    1.  index portion of the L/R_Key is always owned by the CI

2.  **8 bit key** in the least significant bits of the L/R_Key

    1.  Allocate L_key - owned by Consumer

    2.  Register/Reregister MR, Register Shared MR - owned by CI

    3.  Register/Reregister PMR - Consumer chooses the ownership (CI or Consumer)

        - Can execute fast registration only when consumer owns the key

</div>

</div>

### Memory Window

#### Objective

Consumer uses Memory Window for **more flexible control** over **remote access** to its memory.

- grant and revoke remote access rights to a registered region in a dynamic fashion with less of a performance penalty than using deregistration/registration

- grant different remote access rights 1) to different remote agents and 2) over different ranges within a registered region

<div>

</div>

#### Typical use case \[[ref](https://www.openfabrics.org/images/eventpresos/2017presentations/112_Extended_Memory_Windows-_TOved.pdf)\]

- Register one local memory buffer with no remote access

- Provide peer proper access rights and aperture only throughout the duration of the expected transaction

  - How? By opening a window into an existing MR

- =\> **Efficient, safe remote transaction**

  - does not consume new transition resource

#### Relation between MR and MW

- Multiple memory windows can bound to the same memory region

- Their associated areas are allowed to be overlapping or disjoint

**o10-37.2.41**: If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the CI shall support multiple Type 1, Type 2, or both Type 1 and Type 2 Memory Windows bound to the same Memory Region, each with independent remote access rights, and their associated areas shall be allowed to be overlapping or disjoint

#### How to use Memory Window?

We can use memory window after two steps; Allocate and Bind

1.  Allocate Memory Window: Allocates a memory window which is associated with a protection domain. It is not inherently associated with any memory region when allocated

2.  Bind Memory Window: Bind a memory window with a specific memory region. Consumer sets 1) MR to bind with 2) address range - using addr(=VA) and length 3) remote access flags.

<div>

</div>

#### Types

- **Type 1 vs. Type 2**

  - Type 1 Memory Window : Mandatory

  - Type 2 Memory Window : Mandatory if CI supports **BMM**

<table data-table-width="760" data-layout="default" ac:local-id="baad95bc-ad3a-4fe0-a539-a165588224c7">
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Feature</strong></p></td>
<td><p><strong>Type 1 Memory Window</strong></p></td>
<td><p><strong>Type 2 Memory Window</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Invalidation* (local, remote)</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Not allowed</p></td>
<td><p>Allowed</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Bind the already valid MW</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Possible</p></td>
<td><p>Impossible, need to invalidate first</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Key Ownership**</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Channel Interface (CI)<br />
(Bind input doesn’t contain R_Key)</p></td>
<td><p>Consumer<br />
(Bind input contains R_Key)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Bound to single QP***</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Not allowed</p></td>
<td><p>Allowed for type 2A</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Binding Mechanism</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Bind Memory Window Verb</p></td>
<td><p>Post Send Bind MW</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Fast Registration</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Not allowed</p></td>
<td><p>Not allowed</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\* Local invalidation : Post send local invalidate WR, Remote invalidation : Send with invalidate

\*\* Key ownership : Who manage and save the ‘key’ portion of R_Key

\*\*\* Bound to single QP : Only the QP on which MW was bound can access the MW. Other QPs even in the same PD cannot access the MW

\*\*\*\* Type 1 Memory Window can also be invalidated using Bind Memory Window with zero-length.

**C10-66.2.4**: After a zero-length Type 1 Memory Window Bind completes, the CI shall not allow any remote access to be performed to that Type 1 Memory Window until a subsequent Bind re-enables remote access.

<div>

<div>

:info:

</div>

<div>

atlassian-info

</div>

<div>

\#F4F5F7

</div>

<div>

**R_Key of Memory Window**

1\. Allocate Memory Window

<u>R_Key is assigned</u> and exposed to the Consumer by the output of verb. Memory Window has a unique key index pool which is separate from Memory Region.

2\. Bind Memory Window

The <u>key portion of the R_Key is modified</u>. For type 1 MW, it is modified and managed by Channel Interface. On the other hand, the Consumer modifies and manages the R_Key of type 2 MW.

</div>

</div>

#### Binding Mechanism (Bind Memory Window Verb vs. Post Send Bind MW)

- Both mechanism eventually sends Work Request with opcode=IB_WR_BIND_MW at specific Send Queue

- Verb is different: `ibv_bind_mw` vs. `ibv_wr_bind_mw` (or `ibv_post_send`)

  - R_Key ownership is different (= Verb input differs) : CI vs. Consumer

  - Error cases are different

- Code reference (Bind Memory Window Verb)

  - libibverbs : `ibv_bind_mw` → ops.bind_mw (link to mlx5_bind_mw, rxe_bind_mw, mb_bind_mw)

    - input : qp, mw, mw_bind(wr_id, send_flag, bind_info(mr, addr, length, access_flag))

  - both `mlx5_bind_mw` and `rxe_bind_mw`

    - internally calls post_send()

    - driver assigns new rkey = {

      <div>

      origin index

      </div>

      , origin key + 1}

    - (e.g., `wr.bind_mw.rkey = ibv_inc_rkey(mw->rkey);`)

  - kernel driver does not support bind operations?

    - linux/include/rdma/ib_verbs.h : only alloc_mw, dealloc_mw are defined as ib_device_ops

    - drivers/infiniband/hw/mlx5/main.c : only alloc_mw, dealloc_mw, no codes to handle IB_WR_BIND_MW

<!-- -->

- **Type 2A vs. Typs 2B**

  - Need to support only one of them

    1.  \*NVIDIA supports type 2B \[<a href="https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/mlnxofedv531001/optimized+memory+access" data-card-appearance="inline">https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/mlnxofedv531001/optimized+memory+access</a>\]

  - Type 2A keeps more strict rule (=can be bound to the single QP)

    1.  For type 2A, only the <u>QP on which MW was bound</u> can access/invalidate MW

    2.  For type 2B, the <u>QP from same PD as MW</u> can also access/invalidate MW

<div>

</div>

\*\* Invalidation for Free state MW is regarded as no-op if PD matches \[10.6.7.2.9\]

#### Ordering rule

- For both MW types, <u>any work request</u> posted to a send queue subsequent to a bind WR <u>shall not begin execution until the bind completes</u>. Local invalidate WRs are an exception.

- Usage

  - To ensure that no remote agent attempts to use a new R_Key before its associated binding has been completed, a consumer submit the Bind operation to the same SQ it uses to send the message that conveys the new Rkey to the remote agent

- Reference

**o10-37.2.36**: Any Work Request posted to a Send Queue subsequent to a Post Send Bind WR shall not begin execution until the <u>Post Send Bind WR</u> completes. Local Invalidate WRs posted subsequent to a Post Send Bind WR are an exception.

**o10-37.2.25**: If an HCA supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, any Work Request posted to a Send Queue subsequent to an invocation of the <u>Bind Memory Window Verb</u> shall not begin execution until the Bind operation completes. Local Invalidate WRs posted subsequent to a Bind Memory Window Verb are an exception

#### Error handling

- Memory Window access rights

  - Remote Write Access or Remote Atomic Access must not be specified unless the Memory Region has Local Write Access

- Invalidation for Type 1 Memory Window

  - **o10-37.2.26**: For an HCA that supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, Local Invalidate WRs shall not allowed on Type 1 Memory Windows

  - **o10-37.2.27**: For an HCA that supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, if an incoming Send with Invalidate targets an R_Key associated with a Type 1 Memory Window, the CI shall:

    - surface a Memory Management Operation completion error;

    - not affect the state of the Type 1 Memory Window; and

    - place the QP in the Error state

#### Use cases

- Cannot find actual use case from applications (MPI, NVMeoF) - simple grep

- GDR is implemented using MLNX PeerDirect technology

  - Memory Windows API cannot co-work with peer memory clients (Mellanox PeerDirect™). \[<a href="https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/mlnxofedv531001/optimized+memory+access" data-card-appearance="inline">https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/mlnxofedv531001/optimized+memory+access</a>\]

  - Re-registration of MRs that uses Mellanox PeerDirect™ technology are not supported.

#### HW requirements to support memory window (naive)

1.  Keep Memory Window structures

    1.  MW rkey : {index, key}, MW type

    2.  corresponding MR, starting iova, length, access flags, pd (=local dma lkey)

2.  Ordering rule

    1.  Do not begin execution for subsequent WRs before the bind completes

3.  Error handling

    1.  Detect error from outbound requests

    2.  If error occurs, make QP to error state

## Base Memory Management Extensions (BMM)

<div>

<div>

1

</div>

<div>

3

</div>

<div>

false

</div>

<div>

none

</div>

<div>

Intro\|Glossary\|Backups\|Broadcom\|\_mr\|Mandatory\|Verbs\|Region\|Window\|Additional

</div>

<div>

list

</div>

<div>

true

</div>

</div>

### Overview

1.  Provide more <u>efficient</u> memory registration mechanism

    1.  Memory (pre)allocation, Fast registration, Invalidation

<div>

</div>

2.  Provide the RNIC direct access to host <u>physical addresses</u>

    1.  Reserved L_Key

3.  Provide Type 2 Memory Window (see Memory Window part)

<div>

<div>

**Key state transition**

1.  Invalid state

    1.  PD X, PBL resource X, MR X

2.  Free state

    1.  PD O, PBL resource O, MR X

3.  Valid state

    1.  PD O, PBL resource O, MR O

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

#### Additional extensions

- <u>Block List based Physical Buffer List</u>, requires Base Memory Management Extensions to also be supported

- <u>Zero Based Virtual Address (ZBVA)</u>, requires Base Memory Management Extensions to also be supported

- <u>Local Invalidate Fencing</u>, requires Base Memory Management Extensions to also be supported

</div>

</div>

### Preallocate memory region

#### Allocate L_Key

<u>Pre-allocates MR resources</u> for use in future memory registrations. Consumer owns the key portion of L_Key/R_Key that is returned from this verb. L_Key/R_Key become free state after executing this verb.

- What is MR resources?

  - 1\) Protection Domain

  - 2\) PBL resources

  - 3\) L_Key, R_Key(if remote access is requested) : Free state, Consumer owns the keys

- Allocate L_Key input/output

  - input: Protection domain, Requested size of the PBL resources, Remote access requested (=Requests that an R_Key to be returned)

  - output: MR handle, L_Key, R_Key (only when remote access is requested), Actual size of allocated PBL resources

- Code reference

  - **Actually implemented with** `alloc_mr` **functions**

    - <div>

      <div>

      struct ib_mr \*(\*alloc_mr)(struct ib_pd \*pd, enum ib_mr_type mr_type, u32 max_num_sg);

      </div>

      </div>

    - supported MR types (mlx5): `IB_TYPE_MEM_REG`, `IB_TYPE_SG_GAPS`, `IB_MR_TYPE_INTEGRITY`

    - allocate R_Key (=L_Key) for all three types

  - e.g., mlx5

    - `mlx5_ib_alloc_mr`

      - 1\) Allocate memory for MR structure (mlx5_ib_mr)

      - 2\) Allocate PBL resources (`mlx5_alloc_priv_descs` - MEM_REG type MR)

      - 3\) Set L_Key, R_Key

  - **e.g., bnxt_re**

    - Support only for `IB_MR_TYPE_MEM_REG` type MR

    - Allocate MR resources and send related information to the hardware

- MB also supports this feature at the software side, but do not send any requests to the hardware

### Fast Registration (i.e., Fast Register Physical MR)

A Fast Registration associates pre-allocated MR with a data buffer.

#### Fast Registration Steps (Code reference)

1.  Pin the data buffer and map the PAs with the pre-allocated PBL resources

    1.  `ib_map_mr_sg`

2.  Update the Key to reuse the MR

    1.  `ib_update_fast_reg_key`

3.  Request through a Send Queue with opcode=IB_WR_REG_MR

#### Characteristic

- Fast Register Physical MR Operation is allowed on Non-Shared Physical Memory Regions that were created with a Consumer owned key portion of L_Key/R_Key for the RC, RD, UC, and XRC Service Types.

- Allowed only on the QP which enables Fast Registration flag when created

- CI must return error for several cases

  - the set of memory locations passed in through the Fast Registration are not less than or equal to the resources reserved for memory locations by the verb that created the L_Key used in the Fast Registra tion; (resource insufficiency)

  - the PD associated with the L_Key passed in through the Fast Registration is not the same as the PD associated with the QP performing the Fast Registration; (PD violation)

  - QP performing the Fast Registration does not have Fast Registration enabled; (QP flag violation)

  - the L_Key passed in through the Fast Registration is in the Invalid or Valid State; (L_Key invalid)

  - remote access is requested by the Consumer, but the R_Key is not enabled. (R_Key invalid)

#### Ordering rule

- **o10-37.2.6**: If the HCA supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the <u>Fast Registration must take place before any subsequent Work Request on the same Send Queue is started</u>.

  - The Consumer do not need to wait for RNIC to confirm the MR has been registered. Consumer shall use the same Send Queue for WQEs using that MR. =\> Efficient

  - Note, the Consumer may rely on having the Fast Registration complete before the HCA begins processing any subsequent WQEs. After successful posting, <u>if the Fast Registration fails, then the QP goes to the Error state and all subsequent WQEs are flushed</u>.

#### Current Implementation & Requirement

1.  Current Implementation

    1.  Software side

        1.  All MR registrations (reg_user_mr, post_send w/ REG_MR) reach to the `mb_cmd_reg_mr`, which generates WQE with opcode = IB_WR_REG_MR and posts it to the SQ 0

    2.  Hardware side

        1.  MR registration and data-path operations are handled in parallel → do not keep any ordering rule

2.  Requirement

    1.  Software side

        1.  We need to differentiate fast registration (= post send w/ REG_MR) and send it through the requested QP

    2.  Hardware side

        1.  We need to differentiate fast registration and normal registration

        2.  For fast registration, we need (1) to keep ordering rule and (2) not to degrade the performance

### Invalidation

When the Consumer no longer needs to access a Physical Memory Region, but wishes to retain the L_Key or R_Key (and related MR resources), for use in future Memory Registrations, the Consumer may invalidate the Memory Region, through:

- 1\) a local Post Send Local Invalidate WR **(local invalidation)**

- 2\) a remote Send with Invalidate Operation **(remote invalidation)**

#### Characteristic

1.  Keys are placed in <u>Free state</u>, and can no longer be used to access local memory, but it still has physical buffer list resources allocated.

2.  The Invalidate Operation is allowed only on (a) <u>Non-Shared Physical Memory Regions</u> or (b) <u>Type 2 Memory Windows</u> for the RC, RD, UC, and XRC Service Types.

    1.  Invalidated Non-Shared Physical Memory Regions are reused by Fast Register Physical MR

    2.  Invalidated Type 2 Memory Windows are reused by (re)Bind Memory Window

- (reference)

  - **o9-5.2.2**: For a CA which supports <u>remote invalidate,</u> prior to executing a remote invalidate operation, the R_Key contained in the IETH must be validated. To be considered valid, all of the following conditions must be true:

    - For an HCA, the R_Key must not reference a memory region that was created through a Register Memory Region or Reregister Memory Region.

    - For an HCA, the R_Key must not reference a Shared Memory Region

    - For an HCA, the R_Key must not reference a type 1 memory window

#### Ordering rules for local invalidation

- \(1\) Relaxed ordered : default

  - before a completion of the invalidate operation is generated

  - before any subsequent WQE has begun execution

  - reference

    - **o10-37.2.19**: Relaxed ordered - The invalidate operation may take place at any time after it has been posted to the Send Queue but must take place before a completion is generated and before any subsequent WQE has begun execution

- \(2\) Strongly ordered : if the CI supports ***Local Invalidate Fencing (extension)***

  - <u>after all preceding WQEs (including prior Write or Send requests) have completed</u>

  - before a completion of the invalidate operation is generated

  - before any subsequent WQE has begun execution

  - reference

    - **o10-37.2.20**: If the CI supports Local Invalidate Fencing: Strongly ordered - The Invalidate operation must take place after all preceding WQEs on the same Send Queue have completed and before the next WQE (immediately after the Invalidate) on the same Send Queue begins execution

    - **o10-53.2.4**: If the HCA supports Local Invalidate Fencing, when the Local Invalidate Fence Indicator has been set in a Local Invalidate Work Request, the Send Queue shall not begin processing that Work Request until <u>all requests (including prior Write or Send requests)</u> on that Send Queue have completed. Additionally, the Send Queue shall not begin processing the Work Request immediately after the Local Invalidate Work Request, until the Local Invalidate Work Request has finished processing

  - **o10-37.2.23**: If the CI supports Local Invalidate Fencing, then for Non Shared PMRs the CI must support:

    - Strong Invalidation Ordering when the Consumer sets the Local Invalidate Fence on an Local Invalidate WR; and

    - Relaxed Invalidation Ordering when the Consumer does not specify the Local Invalidate Fence on an Local Invalidate WR.

<div>

<div>

The **Local Invalidate Fencing** is apart from **fence indicator** set at the work request.

- If the fence indicator is set, then <u>all prior RDMA Read and Atomic Work Requests</u> on the queue must be completed before starting to process this Work Request. The Fence indicator only has an effect with the Reliable Connection and Reliable Datagram transport service

  - **C10-100:** When the Fence Indicator has been set in a Work Request, the Send Queue shall not begin processing that Work Request until <u>all prior RDMA Read and Atomic Operations on that Send Queue</u> have completed

- Code reference

  - fence indicator can be set at `ib_send_flags` in `ib_send_wr`

    - <div>

      </div>

  - rxe: requester sets `wait_fence`, completer unset it after completion

    - local invalidate fencing vs. fence indicator

    - <div>

      <div>

      206 static int rxe_wqe_is_fenced(struct rxe_qp \*qp, struct rxe_send_wqe \*wqe) 207 { 208 /\* Local invalidate fence (LIF) see IBA 10.6.5.1 209 \* Requires ALL previous operations on the send queue 210 \* are complete. Make mandatory for the rxe driver. 211 \*/ 212 if (wqe-\>wr.opcode == IB_WR_LOCAL_INV) 213 return qp-\>req.wqe_index != queue_get_consumer(qp-\>sq.queue, 214 QUEUE_TYPE_FROM_CLIENT); 215 216 /\* Fence see IBA 10.8.3.3 217 \* Requires that all previous read and atomic operations 218 \* are complete. 219 \*/ 220 return (wqe-\>wr.send_flags & IB_SEND_FENCE) && 221 atomic_read(&qp-\>req.rd_atomic) != qp-\>attr.max_rd_atomic; 222 }

      </div>

      </div>

  - bnxt_re : transfer it to the hardware

    - use `BNXT_QPLIB_SWQE_FLAGS_UC_FENCE` both for local invalidate and fence indicator

      - local invalidate request, fast registration : always set fence flag

      - other requests : set fence flag if `IBV_SEND_FENCE` is set

- Our software/hardware currently do **not** support it - SW does not transfer this flag to HW

- **UCX seems to use IBV_SEND_FENCE**

  - <div>

    <div>

    c

    </div>

    <div>

    \#src/uct/ib/rc/verbs/rc_verbs_ep.c 34 uct_rc_verbs_ep_post_send(uct_rc_verbs_iface_t\* iface, uct_rc_verbs_ep_t\* ep, 35 struct ibv_send_wr \*wr, int send_flags, int max_log_sge) 36 { 37 struct ibv_send_wr \*bad_wr; 38 int ret; 39 40 ucs_assertv(ep-\>qp-\>state == IBV_QPS_RTS, "QP 0x%x state is %d", 41 ep-\>qp-\>qp_num, ep-\>qp-\>state); 42 43 if (!(send_flags & IBV_SEND_SIGNALED)) { 44 send_flags \|= uct_rc_iface_tx_moderation(&iface-\>super, &ep-\>super.txqp, 45 IBV_SEND_SIGNALED); 46 } 47 if (wr-\>opcode == IBV_WR_RDMA_READ) { 48 send_flags \|= uct_rc_ep_fm(&iface-\>super, &ep-\>fi, IBV_SEND_FENCE); 49 } \#src/uct/ib/rc/base/rc_ep.h 510 uct_rc_ep_fm(uct_rc_iface_t \*iface, uct_ib_fence_info_t\* fi, int flag) 511 { 512 int fence; 513 514 /\* a call to iface_fence increases beat, so if endpoint beat is not in 515 \* sync with iface beat it means the endpoint did not post any WQE with 516 \* fence flag yet \*/ 517 fence = (fi-\>fence_beat != iface-\>tx.fi.fence_beat) ? flag : 0; 518 fi-\>fence_beat = iface-\>tx.fi.fence_beat; 519 return fence; 520 }

    </div>

    </div>

</div>

</div>

### Reserved L_Key

Provide the HCA direct access to host **physical addresses.** Note, the Reserved L_Key is a local key and remote access cannot be performed through the Reserved L_Key.

**o10-37.2.8**: For a CI that supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the CI must return an error if the Consumer attempts to: bind a Memory Window to the Reserved L_Key, Invalidate the Reserved L_Key, destroy the Reserved L_Key, or any type of Registration using the Reserved L_Key

- Same as `local_dma_lkey` (or `global_lkey` for our hardware)

- Question) Does a Reserved L_Key exist <u>Per PD? or Per RNIC?</u>

  - depends on the flag of device

  - Reference

    - when executing ib_alloc_pd()

      - if flat IBK_LOCAL_DMA_LKEY is set, pd-\>local_dma_lkey = device-\>local_dma_lkey

      - else, generate internal MR (=IB_MR_TYPE_DMA) and pd-\>local_dma_lkey=internal_mr-\>lkey

    - flag: IBK_LOCAL_DMA_LKEY (ib_kernel_cap_flags)

      - read from hw (MLX5_GET macro) when executing query_device

      - save at ib_device-\>ib_device_attr

<div>

<div>

c

</div>

<div>

279 enum ib_kernel_cap_flags { 280 /\* 281 \* This device supports a per-device lkey or stag that can be 282 \* used without performing a memory registration for the local 283 \* memory. Note that ULPs should never check this flag, but 284 \* instead of use the local_dma_lkey flag in the ib_pd structure, 285 \* which will always contain a usable lkey. 286 \*/ 287 IBK_LOCAL_DMA_LKEY = 1 \<\< 0, 288 /\* IB_QP_CREATE_INTEGRITY_EN is supported to implement T10-PI \*/ 289 IBK_INTEGRITY_HANDOVER = 1 \<\< 1, 290 /\* IB_ACCESS_ON_DEMAND is supported during reg_user_mr() \*/ 291 IBK_ON_DEMAND_PAGING = 1 \<\< 2, 292 /\* IB_MR_TYPE_SG_GAPS is supported \*/ 293 IBK_SG_GAPS_REG = 1 \<\< 3, 294 /\* Driver supports RDMA_NLDEV_CMD_DELLINK \*/ 295 IBK_ALLOW_USER_UNREG = 1 \<\< 4, 296 297 /\* ipoib will use IB_QP_CREATE_BLOCK_MULTICAST_LOOPBACK \*/ 298 IBK_BLOCK_MULTICAST_LOOPBACK = 1 \<\< 5, 299 /\* iopib will use IB_QP_CREATE_IPOIB_UD_LSO for its QPs \*/ 300 IBK_UD_TSO = 1 \<\< 6, 301 /\* iopib will use the device ops: 302 \* get_vf_config 303 \* get_vf_guid 304 \* get_vf_stats 305 \* set_vf_guid 306 \* set_vf_link_state 307 \*/ 308 IBK_VIRTUAL_FUNCTION = 1 \<\< 7, 309 /\* ipoib will use IB_QP_CREATE_NETDEV_USE for its QPs \*/ 310 IBK_RDMA_NETDEV_OPA = 1 \<\< 8, 311 };

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

c

</div>

<div>

251 /\*\* 252 \* \_\_ib_alloc_pd - Allocates an unused protection domain. 253 \* @device: The device on which to allocate the protection domain. 254 \* @flags: protection domain flags 255 \* @caller: caller's build-time module name 256 \* 257 \* A protection domain object provides an association between QPs, shared 258 \* receive queues, address handles, memory regions, and memory windows. 259 \* 260 \* Every PD has a local_dma_lkey which can be used as the lkey value for local 261 \* memory operations. 262 \*/ 263 struct ib_pd \*\_\_ib_alloc_pd(struct ib_device \*device, unsigned int flags, 264 const char \*caller) 265 { ... 288 if (device-\>attrs.kernel_cap_flags & IBK_LOCAL_DMA_LKEY) 289 pd-\>local_dma_lkey = device-\>local_dma_lkey; 290 else 291 mr_access_flags \|= IB_ACCESS_LOCAL_WRITE; ... 298 if (mr_access_flags) { 299 struct ib_mr \*mr; 301 mr = pd-\>device-\>ops.get_dma_mr(pd, mr_access_flags); ... 308 mr-\>pd = pd; 309 mr-\>type = IB_MR_TYPE_DMA; 313 pd-\>\_\_internal_mr = mr; 315 if (!(device-\>attrs.kernel_cap_flags & IBK_LOCAL_DMA_LKEY)) 316 pd-\>local_dma_lkey = pd-\>\_\_internal_mr-\>lkey; 320 } 321 322 return pd; 323 }

</div>

</div>

- Code reference

  - mlx5

    - Not supported?

    - <div>

      </div>

### Use Case (NVMeoF)

NVMeoF assumes that the device supports base memory management extensions. This application uses invalidation - fast registration repeatedly to the data buffer.

1.  Assume base memory management extension

    1.  after addr_resolved → find get device : return error if the device do not support BMM

    2.  <div>

        <div>

        c

        </div>

        <div>

        \# host/rdma.c 445 static struct nvme_rdma_device \* 446 nvme_rdma_find_get_device(struct rdma_cm_id \*cm_id) 447 { ..... 469 if (!(ndev-\>dev-\>attrs.device_cap_flags & 470 IB_DEVICE_MEM_MGT_EXTENSIONS)) { 471 dev_err(&ndev-\>dev-\>dev, 472 "Memory registrations not supported.\n"); 473 goto out_free_pd; 474 }

        </div>

        </div>

2.  ‘Fast registration - Remote invalidation’ to the data buffer

    1.  Allocate Memory Region

        1.  Pre-allocate memory regions at MR pool (`qp->rdma_mrs`) : type - IB_MR_TYPE_MEM_REG

    2.  Fast Registration

        1.  Map a block layer request to sglist via `blk_rq_map_sg`

        2.  Get a MR from pre-allocated MR pool

        3.  Map the MR to the sglist (`ib_map_mr_sg`)

        4.  Setup the work request with IB_WR_REG_MR

    3.  Send with invalidate from the remote node

    4.  Repeat b ~ c

### Additional features in specification

1.  Key format

    - **o10-37.2.1:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions defined in this specification, the L_Key format must consist of: 24bit index + 8bit key

2.  Key ownership

    - **o10-37.2.2:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions defined in this specification, then when an L_Key is created:

      - Index portion : always owned by the CI

      - Key portion

        - Consumer : Allocate L_Key verb

        - CI : Register/Reregister MR, or Register Shared MR verb

        - Consumer or CI (consumer’s choice) : Register/Reregister Physical MR verb

3.  Error handling

    1.  **o10-2.2.4**: If an HCA supports the Base Memory Management extensions and supports Type 2A Memory Windows, then the HCA must return an error if the Consumer attempts to destroy a QP while Type 2A MWs are still bound to the QP

    2.  **o10-36.2.5**: If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the CI must return an error if a Shared Memory Region is used as an input modifier for the Fast Register Physical MR or Local Invalidate

    3.  **o10-37.2.6:** If the HCA supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the Fast Registration must take place before any subsequent Work Request on the same Send Queue is started

    4.  …

4.  Ordering rules

    1.  MW (for all types) : before subsequent WR begins. Local invalidate WRs are an exception

    2.  Fast Registration : must take place before any subsequent WR starts

    3.  Invalidation :  
        1) relaxed ordered (default) - before subsequent WR begins  
        2) strongly ordered (extension) - before subsequent WR begins + after all previous WR ends  
        **o10-37.2.22**: If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Exten sions, then for Non-Shared PMRs the CI must support Relaxed Invalidation Ordering and does not have to support Local Invalidate Fencing.

5.  Work Request list

    1.  **C11-23**: If the CI <u>does not support the Base Queue Management Extension</u>s, the CI shall return control to the Consumer immediately after the <u>Work Request</u> has been submitted to the Send Queue

    2.  **o11-5.2.1**: If the CI <u>supports the Base Queue Management Extension</u>s, the CI shall return control to the Consumer immediately after <u>the list of Work Request</u> has been submitted to the Send Queue

6.  Misc.

    1.  **o10-37.2.10**: If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, the CI must return the size reserved for physical buffer list from the following verbs: Allocate L_Key, Query Memory Region, Register Physical Memory Region, and Reregister Physical Memory Region

#### 20.3 HCA-CI COMPLIANCE CATEGORY

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

## Backups

#### Specification 11.1.1

1.  Allow consumer to **allocate memory region** for use in future registration

    1.  *Allocate L_Key*

2.  Allow consumer to perform non-pipelined\* local memory region registration through send queue

    1.  *Post Send Reg MR → used for **fast registration***

3.  Allow consumer to perform non-pipelined\* **local invalidation** of registered memory region and memory windows through send queue

    1.  *Post Send Local Invalidate*

4.  Allow consumer to perform **remote invalidation** of memory regions and memory windows

    1.  *Send with Invalidate*

5.  Enable the direct access of physical address by the HCA through the use of **reserved L_Key**

6.  Provide the following additions to existing memory management verbs:

    1.  Enable memory windows to be <u>associated with a single QP</u>

        1.  *type 2A memory window - only allow the QP who has bound MW access/invalidate that MW*

    2.  <u>Enable the Consumer to own the key portion</u> of the L_Key field for memory regions and the key portion of the R_Key for memory regions and memory windows

        1.  *Allocate L_Key*

        2.  *Bind type 2 memory window*

        3.  *Register Physical Memory Region w/ key ownership requested*

    3.  Explicitly define whether a memory region is Shared or Non-Shared

        1.  <div>

            </div>

- For a queue operation, a *non-pipelined* operation may be performed before the preceding operations posted to the same queue complete.

**o11-0.2.1:** If the HCA supports an extension, then <u>it must support all</u> the verbs and modifiers associated with that extension in this specification

#### UD QP

Note that for UD QPs, the first 40 bytes of the buffer(s) referred to by the Scatter/Gather list will contain the GRH of the incoming message. If no GRH is present, the contents of first 40 bytes of the buffer(s) will be undefined. The presence of the GRH will be indicated by a bit in the Work Completion

#### Ordering rule for WR

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

#### MW Related structures (libibverbs)

<div>

</div>

- `pd`, `type` : input for allocate_mw

- `rkey` : assigned at allocate_mw → key portion will be modified at bind_mw

  - MW has unique index pool (separate from MR)

#### MR structures

1.  Rxe

    1.  <div>

        </div>

    2.  

2.  Mlnx5

    1.  <div>

        </div>

    2.  

#### Verbs input/output

- Register Memory Region

  - Input: HCA handle, VA, Length, PD, Access Control, Type (VA or ZBVA)

  - Output: MR handle, L_Key, R_Key

- Register Physical Memory Region

  - Input:

    - HCA handle, Length, PD, Access Control, Type (VA or ZBVA)

    - Key ownership requested\* : Consumer requests ownership of the key portion of L_Key and R_Key, if any was requested. Note, if the Consumer doesn’t request ownership of the key portion, then the L_Key and R_Key, if any was requested, returned from this verb cannot be used in a Fast Register Physical MR.

      - If requested, Key to use on new L_Key and R_Key

    - Physical buffer related fields

      - Physical Buffer List (=PA list), Page Size, Physical Buffer Size, Total number of physical buffer in the list (=page num)

    - IOVA for VA type (for ZBVA type, no IOVA is passed)

    - Offset of Region’s starting IOVA within the first physical buffer.

  - Output: MR handle, IOVA, L_Key, R_Key, Actual size of PBL resources allocated

- Register Shared Memory Region

  - Input: HCA handle, <u>MR handle (already registered region),</u> VA\*, PD, Access Control, Type (VA or ZBVA)

    - No length field - same memory locations with input MR

    - Virtual Address - requested by the Consumer for the first page of the buffer

  - Output : MR handle (new), VA\*, L_Key, R_Key

    - Virtual Address - actually assigned by the Channel Interface for the first page.

- Post Send Request

  - 

#### Error handling (MW)

**o10-37.2.40**: For a Type 2 MW, if the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions and the Consumer attempts to Invalidate a Type 2 Memory Window through either the invocation of a Bind Memory Window or a Post Send Bind WR with a length of zero, the CI must return an error.

#### MR Type

1.  MR type

    1.  Reference

        1.  Mellanox nvme driver (mlnx-ofed-kernel-23.04/driver)

            1.  IB_MR_TYPE_MEM_REG : remote에서 사용하는 MR들 - 사실 remote 용도로만 사용함, local로 사용할 때 request에 들어있는 address가 VA인지 PA인지 명시적으로 확인할 수 없었음

            2.  IB_MR_TYPE_DMA : local로 사용, local_dma_lkey를 통해 할당하고 PA를 넣어줌

                1.  VA=PA이고 translation이 없는 MR

    2.  현재 우리 하드웨어는 MR_TYPE_USER가 아닌 경우에 request에 들어오는 address는 모두 PA로 간주하고 짜여져 있음

        1.  이게 맞나? 확실하지 않음

<div>

</div>

#### Pinning

누가 pinning을 하는가

**C10-52.2.1:** Using the Verbs defined in this specification, when a Memory Region is registered through a Register Memory Region and Reregister Memory Region, the **CI** must pin down in physical memory every physical buffer within the Memory Region.

Prior to invoking a Register Physical Memory Region or Reregister Physical Memory Region Verb, the **Consumer** should pin down in physical memory every physical buffer within the Memory Region.

If the HCA supports the Base Memory Management Extensions, when a Memory Region is registered through a Fast Register PMR, the **Consumer** should pin down in physical memory every physical buffer within the Memory Region.

Pinning down in physical memory every physical buffer within a Memory Region guarantees to the HCA that the Memory Region is physically resident (not swapped out) and that the virtual to physical translation remains fixed while the region is registered.

#### Code details

1.  HW가 base memory management extension을 support한다는 것은 어떤 식으로 알리는가?

    1.  linux/include/rdma/ib_verbs.h

        1.  ib_device_cap_flags { IB_DEVICE_MEM_MGT_EXTENSIONS }

    2.  Query HCA Verb output

        1.  Ability of this HCA to support the **Base Memory Management Extensions.** If HCA supports the Base Memory Management Extensions:

            1.  **Value of Reserved L_Key.**

            2.  Maximum Physical Buffer List size supported by this HCA when invoking the Allocate L_Key verb.

            3.  List of Page sizes supported by this HCA.

            4.  Bound Type 2 Memory Window Association mechanism:

                1.  Type 2A - QP Number Association; or

                2.  Type 2B - QP Number and PD Association.

======

### Broadcom driver (bnxt_re)

<div>

</div>

### alloc_mr

### dereg_mr

### get_dma_mr

### map_mr_sg

### reg_user_mr

### reg_user_mr_dmabuf
