# DCQCN in detail

<!-- id=112460043 parent=76644711 -->

# Overview

**Datacenter Quantized Congestion Notification (DCQCN)** was proposed to overcome the limitations of the existing CC algorithms available on RoCEv2 ([paper](https://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2015/pdf/papers/p523.pdf)). Its idea is based on the combination of **Quantized Congestion Notification** (**QCN**, which has focused on detecting congestions and generating feedbacks) and **Datacenter TCP** (**DCTCP**, which has focused on advanced rate control algorithm), while some details are different from the original twos.

The authors of DCQCN paper argue that they have achieved three main and two sub objectives with DCQCN:

- (Main) Flow-based lossless CC, rather than port-based one like PFC

- (Main) CC system with minimal CPU utilization

- (Main) Performance preservation even with short, bursty loads (like storage operations)

- (Sub) Better fairness among multi-endpoints system as well as fast convergence to that equilibrium

- (Sub) Minimal rate oscillation, especially in case of multi-endpoints

One notable fact is that the paper clearly states its method of implementation about the rate control logic. In particular, the takeaways can be summarized as two points:

- The authors clarified that they used the **rate-based control**, rather than the window-based control like TCP does. So it appears to involve an explicit “throttling” to the outbound packet transmission.

- In addition, they mentioned **HW rate limiter** in the paper – the above throttling logic seems to be operating on HW, at least in CX. (Since the paper is from Mellanox)

(As shown in

<div>

<div>

my summary that explains ECN

</div>

</div>

, CX utilizes both SW and HW for its CC logic. However, regarding the words from the paper, *I think SW takes only the minimal parts; such as DCQCN variable passing to HW*.)

# DCQCN rate control algorithm

The basic principle of DCQCN rate control is similar to Additive Increase-Multiplicative Decrease (AIMD), which is commonly used in TCP CC. In a way, it is just more fine-tuned and more history-aware version of AIMD.

The figure below describes the control path of DCQCN rate adjustment. For clear understanding, I indicated the **actual injection rate update** with a <span style="color: rgb(255,86,48);">red</span> region and the **intermediate parameter update** with a <span style="color: rgb(7,71,166);">blue</span> region.

Note that two events work separately. They use different timer/counter that does not interfere with each other. Only one exception for this fact is an external event of <u>CNP reception</u>, which triggers both ones.

<div>

</div>

**(1) Actual injection rate update**

- Parameters:

  - R_C (Current injection rate, which is directly applied to the rate control)

  - R_T (Target injection rate, kind of the rate upper bound)

- Timers / Counters:

  - Timer (Elapsed time since the latest CNP arrival)

  - ByteCounter (Total bytes sent from this endpoint since the latest CNP arrival)

  - T (# of Timer expirations since the latest CNP arrival)

  - BC (# of ByteCounter expirations since the latest CNP arrival)

- Rate cut in case of CNP arrival

  - When a new CNP arrives, both R_C and R_T are updated following the formula below. α is called rate reduction factor and determines the sensitivity of rate drop; as α varies from 0 to 1, the rate drops more sharply from 1x (no change) to 0.5x (max drop).

<div>

</div>

- Rate recovery / increment scenarios

  - The Timer and ByteCounter are always keeping track of elapsed time / transmitted bytes since the last CNP reception. If either of one meets given threshold, then it expires with triggering a new rate update event.

  - The counts of rate increments by Timer / ByteCounter since the last CNP reception are recorded as well. When an event occurs, the logic decides which rate update algorithm to use based on the value of two counters.

  - The formula that FastRecovery and AdditiveIncrease follow are depicted in below. Though the algorithm for HyperIncrease was not descried in the paper, *I guess it could be done by simple calculations with existing variables as well*.

<div>

<div>

Left - FastRecovery, Right - AdditiveIncrease

</div>

</div>

**(2) Intermediate parameter update**

- Parameters:

  - α (Rate reduction factor)

  - *g* (user-configurable constant that determines the update sensitivity of α)

- Timers:

  - AlphaTimer (Elapsed time since the latest α update)

- Update scenario

  - α itself is also keeping changed based on much simple formula shown in below. If CNP arrives then α increases, approaching to 1. If the time since last CNP arrival exceeds the certain threshold (which must be larger than CNP generation interval), then α decreases toward 0.

  - The changing rate of α is determined by *g*; larger *g* makes larger amount of change in α. Both *g* and the initial value of α are configurable in CX.

<div>

<div>

Left - α increment at CNP arrival  
Right - α decrement at timer expiration

</div>

</div>

# Expected HW and interface requirements

- New event queue dedicated for CC?

  - DCQCN has four different event types - CNPArrived / TimerExpired / ByteCounterExpired / AlphaTimerExpired

- *Per-flow* (*it is not clear whether it means per-QP or per-src-dst IP pair*) data buffer for keeping CC-related parameters listed below

  - R_C, R_T, α, T, BC

  - Depth 1 will be sufficient, since the update logic depends solely on the latest state

- *Per-flow* timer structures, each for measuring the following 3 different time intervals

  - CNP generation timer (specified in DCQCN paper), Timer (for rate increase), AlphaTimer

  - Probably this will be implemented on HW

- *Per-flow* counter structure

  - ByteCounter

  - *I think the outbound ACKs or read responses must be counted as well*. *If so, this logic must be within HW.*

- Calculation logic

  - When detecting any events, the type of update calculation(s) can be determined from the following set of information – {event type, T, and BC}.

  - Types for rate update – CutRate, FastRecovery, HyperIncrease, AdditiveIncrease (with R_C, R_T, α)

  - Types for alpha update - CutAlpha, IncreaseAlpha (with α, *g*)
