# RDMA CM (Communication manager)

<!-- id=113934352 parent=32211017 -->

## Introduction

RDMA CM is a communication manager provied in linux infiniband driver, that is used to setup QP connections (e.g., RC, UD, ..). It expose socket-like APIs (e.g., `rdma_connect, rdma_listen`), so that user can easily use them and cumbersome QP state transitions are internally done during RDMA CM process.

In RoCEv2, **QP 1** is used for RDMA-CM purpose (= reserved). Its type is `IB_QPT_GSI` , and can communication any QP1 at remote side.

For interchanging various control message, `MAD (`

<div>

Management Datagram

</div>

) packets are used. There are several types of MAD message used in RDMA-CM, and they are:

- Connect Request (REQ)

- Connect Reply (REP)

- Ready-to-use (RTU)

- Disconnect Request (DREQ)

- Disconnect Reply (DREP)

- Connection Reject (REJ)

- And more, but you don’t have to know this for now.

Above message takes role in connection establishment / teardown process, like below figures.

<div>

<div>

3-way handshake in connection establishment

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

2-way handshake in connection teardown

</div>

</div>

To understand behaviors of each message (=when and how it is transfered), let’s assume below scenario.

Host 1 wants to establish a queue pair connection with Host 2. Then, one may write down a pseudocode like this:  

\[Client side (host 1)\]

<div>

<div>

c

</div>

<div>

struct rdma_cm_id \*conn = NULL; struct rdma_event_channel \*ec = rdma_create_event_channel(); rdma_create_id(ec, &conn, NULL, RDMA_PS_TCP); rdma_resolve_addr(conn, NULL, addr-\>ai_addr, 500); rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_ADDR_RESOLVED \*/ rdma_ack_cm_event(event); rdma_resolve_route(conn, 2000); rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_ROUTE_RESOLVED \*/ rdma_ack_cm_event(event); fill_qp_attr(qp_attr); rdma_create_qp(conn, NULL, &qp_attr); fill_cm_params(cm_params); rdma_connect(conn, &cm_params); rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_ESTABLISHED \*/ rdma_ack_cm_event(event); /\* Connection done \*/ /\* Some post send \*/ /\* Start disconnect \*/ rdma_disconnect(conn); rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_DISCONNECTED \*/ rdma_ack_cm_event(event); rdma_destroy_qp(conn); rdma_destroy_id(conn); rdma_destroy_event_channel(ec);

</div>

</div>

\[Server side (host 2)\]

<div>

<div>

c

</div>

<div>

struct rdma_cm_id \*conn = NULL; struct rdma_cm_id \*listener = NULL; struct rdma_event_channel \*ec = rdma_create_event_channel(); rdma_create_id(ec, &listener, NULL, RDMA_PS_TCP); rdma_bind_addr(listener, src_addr); rdma_listen(listener, 1); rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_CONNECT_REQUEST \*/ conn = event-\>id; rdma_ack_cm_event(event); fill_qp_attr(qp_attr); rdma_create_qp(conn, NULL, &qp_attr); fill_cm_params(cm_params); rdma_accept(conn, &cm_params); rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_ESTABLISHED \*/ rdma_ack_cm_event(event); /\* Connection done \*/ /\* Some processing... \*/ /\* Wait for disconnect \*/ rdma_get_cm_event(ec, &event); /\* The event should be RDMA_CM_EVENT_DISCONNECTED \*/ rdma_ack_cm_event(event); /\* optional \*/ rdma_disconnect(conn); rdma_destroy_qp(conn); rdma_destroy_id(conn); rdma_destroy_id(listener); rdma_destroy_event_channel(ec);

</div>

</div>

In this example, MAD packets take place in below function:

- rdma_connect

  - It sends a **REQ** message to the server side to initiate connection establishment.

  - At the server side, listening cm_id (generated by rdma_listen) will check the incoming REQ packet, and will push `RDMA_CM_EVENT_CONNECT_REQUEST` to the event channel if incoming REQ is accepted.

<div>

<div>

Question: At the client side, does QP transit to RTS state after rdma_connect is returned?

Answer: NO. This is done when the client side SW stack (e.g., librdmacm or kernel driver) receives REP message. The state machine residing in underlying stack will automatically change QP to RTS state if they receives `RDMA_CM_EVENT_CONNECT_RESPONSE `event.

</div>

</div>

- rdma_accept

  - This function is called after the incoming REQ message is accepted.

  - Its implementation includes transition of QP to RTS state, and it will send **REP** message to the client side.

<div>

<div>

Question: But how RTU packets are sent and received in above process?

Answer: When the client side receives `RDMA_CM_EVENT_CONNECT_RESPONSE`, it will automatically sends RTU message to the server side (and pushes `RDMA_CM_EVENT_ESTABLISHED` event on the event channel). At the server side, once it receives RTU message, it pushes `RDMA_CM_EVENT_ESTABLISHED` event to its event channel.

</div>

</div>

- rdma_disconnect

  - It initiates the termination process of given connection.

  - Internally, sends **DREQ** message to the remote side.

  - Once the server receives DREQ message, it pushes `RDMA_CM_EVENT_DISCONNECTED` event to the event channel.

<div>

<div>

Question: Then, where does DREP take place?

Answer: When the server side calls rdma_destroy_id, the SW stack will check the status of given cm_id and sends DREP to the client if its state is on DREQ_RECEIVED. (But need to re-check)

Or, server can explicitly call rdma_disconnect after receiving DREQ_RECEIVED (SPDK)

- Kernel will skip sending DREQ if the cm state is not ESTABLISHED

</div>

</div>

## Message fields

Then, you may ask which fields are included in each message.

### REQ message (Connection Request)

- This is used for initiating the connection sequence

- REQ message includes below fields (but not limited):

  - Local communiation ID

  - Service ID

  - Local QPN

  - Responder resource

  - Remote CM response timeout

  - Starting psn

  - Local CM response timeout

  - Retry count

  - Initiator depth

  - Payload MTU

  - RNR retry count

  - MAX CM retries

  - SRQ

  - primary port

### REP message (Connection Reply)

- Returned in response to REQ → service ID, primary port, etc are accepted

- Not limited, but

  - Local communication ID

  - Remote communication ID

  - Local QPN

  - Starting psn

  - Responer resource

  - Initiator depth

  - Target ACK delay

  - RNR retry count

  - SRQ

### RTU (Ready to use)

- Indicates connection is established

- Local communication ID

- Remote communication ID

### DREQ (Disconnection Request)

- Initiate connection release sequence

- Includes

  - Local communication ID

  - Remote communication ID

  - Remote QPN

### DREP (Disconnection Reply)

- Is sent in response to DREQ

- Includes

  - Local communication ID

  - Remote communication ID

Below are the description of each fields.

- Local communication ID

  - An identifier that uniquely identifies **this connection** from the sender’s point of view. Should not be reused during the lifecycle of connection. This allow the recipient to determine whether the message is duplicate of an old message, or new message

- Remote communication ID

  - An identifier that uniquely identifies **this connection** from the recipient’s point of view.

  - REP’s remote communiciation ID field should be equal to REQ’s local communication ID field

  - Pair of (Local comm ID, Remote comm ID) is used to reference connection.

- Local QPN

- Responder resource

  - The maximum number of outstanding RDMA read/atomic operation that the sender will “support” for the remote QP

  - The recipient of REQ should choose “Initiator depth” that does not exceed “responder resource” provided in REQ. If could not, then the recipient will send REJ back to the sender.

  - The recipient of REP message should decide whether “responder resource” specified in REP message is sufficient for the initiator depth. If not, it shall send REJ to terminate the conneciton.

- Initiator depth

  - The maximum number of outstanding RDMA read/atomic operation that the sender will “have” to the remote QP

  - The recipient of REQ message should try to choose a local responder resource greater than or equal to the “Initiator depth” specified in REQ message. If could not, it may send a REP message containing “fewer” responder resource than the initiator depth in REQ message.

- Remote CM response timeout

  - Speicify the time interval that recipient shall trasmit the response to the sender. Recipient will decide whether to send MRA or not based on this value.

- Starting psn

  - Specifiy the starting psn value used for transmitting data over newly established connection.

  - **This value should be chosen to minimize the chance that a packet from previous connection could fall within the valid PSN window.**

- Local CM response timeout

  - Specify how long remote CM wait for the response of CM message that is sent to local CM. This includes turn-around time.

- Retry count

  - The total number of times that the sender wishes the receiver to retry timeout, packet sequence, etc. errors before posting a completion error.

- Payload MTU

  - Specify maximum packet payload size.

  - 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096.

- RNR retry count

  - The total number of times that the REQ or REP sender wishes the receiver to retry RNR NAK errors before posting a completion error.

- MAX CM retries

  - Maximum number of times that either side can re-send REQ, REP, or DREQ. If exceeded, then the sender should send REJ to the remote side to indicate it is timed out (so terminate the connection)

- SRQ

  - If QP is associated with an SRQ, this bit must be set to one. If the QP, is not associated with an SRQ, this bit must be set to zero. Only applies for RC or UC.

- Remote QPN

  - The related QP number of remote side, in a given connection

## State transition of cm_id in RDMA CM and timeout mechanism

Since rdma_cm works on top of UD transfer, the packet may be dropped during rdma_cm process.

To ensure reliable connection, there is a timeout mechanism. But this is entirely managed at the software (since it use UD-like data transfer), you do not have to know the detail of it.

Below are state transition diagram for client / server side. (You can use it as a reference)

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>
