# CX SR-IOV QoS Functionality Test

<!-- id=1157955601 parent=130744832 -->

SR-IOV QoS config can be categorized into two ways:

1.  Config. via `ip link set vf`

This Allows for “best-effot” QoS by guaranteeing minimum bandwidth through `min_tx_rate`.

And limiting bandwidth via `max_tx_rate`

2.  Config. via `mlnx_qos`

`mlnx_qos` is a wrapper for easier execution of `dcb` commands, simplifying the use of PFC, TC, and other features. For more info about dcb, refer this [docs](https://www.juniper.net/documentation/kr/ko/software/junos/traffic-mgmt-qfx/topics/concept/fibre-channel-cee-features-understanding.html).

**While it supports rate limiting and ETS (Enhanced Transmission Selection, IEEE 802.1Qaz) for best-effort QoS, I have encountered 'retry exceed' errors with this method and have not yet successfully operationalized it.**

This document covers the configuration of **Best Effort QoS** using `min_tx_rate`. Based on experimental results, the following observations have been made:

1.  **Guaranteed Minimum:** The `min_tx_rate` assigned to each Virtual Function (VF) ensures a guaranteed minimum bandwidth for that specific VF.

2.  Under this scheme, a VF is capable of exceeding its assigned `min_tx_rate` and achieving higher performance when resources are available.

3.  When contention for bandwidth occurs between VFs, the `min_tx_rate` settings determine the actual bandwidth allocation.

4.  **Proportional Allocation:** If the sum of the `min_tx_rate` values assigned to all VFs exceeds the maximum capacity of the NIC, the bandwidth for each VF is determined proportionally based on their respective `min_tx_rate` settings.

## Experiment

1.  First, you must enable SR-IOV in the BIOS. For AMD, please enable VT-d.

2.  To use the MFT tool, start MST and enable the SR-IOV feature .

    The following command for the 2-port CX6 design allows you to assign up to 8 vfs to Port 1 and Port 2 respectively.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

\# mst start \# mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 set SRIOV_EN=1 NUM_OF_VFS_P1=8 NUM_OF_VFS_P2=8 \# reboot

</div>

</div>

3.  Even after rebooting and loading the mlx5 driver, only 2 pfs are exposed.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

link mlx5_0/1 state DOWn physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f0np0 link mlx5_1/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f1np1

</div>

</div>

To create VFs, you must write the desired number of VFs to the sysfs node. In this doc, we create only 4 VFs.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

echo 4 \| sudo tee /sys/class/net/enp206s0f0np0/device/sriov_numvfs

</div>

</div>

Then, you can see 4 VFs are created.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

jaehyun.lee@smc14:~\$ rdma link link mlx5_0/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f0np0 link mlx5_1/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f1np1 link mlx5_2/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f0v0 link mlx5_3/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f0v1 link mlx5_4/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f0v2 link mlx5_5/1 state DOWN physical_state DISABLED netdev enp206s0f0v3

</div>

</div>

4.  Assign an appropriate IP to the VFs.

<div>

</div>

5.  `ip link set <PF_interface> vf <vf_index> min_tx_rate <rate_in_Mbps`

Allocate the desired minimum guaranteed bandwidth to each VF. In the following example, the maximum bandwidth of a single CX6 port (100Gbps) is distributed among VF0, VF1, and VF2 in a 50:30:20 ratio.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

sudo ip link set enp206s0f0v0 vf 0 min_tx_rate 50000 sudo ip link set enp206s0f0v1 vf 1 min_tx_rate 30000 sudo ip link set enp206s0f0v2 vf 2 min_tx_rate 20000

</div>

</div>

6.  run `perftest` with multiple VFs simultaneously.
