# SEND Inline

<!-- id=118981274 parent=32211017 -->

## What is SEND Inline?

“The memory buffers specified in *sg_list* will be placed inline in the Send Request. This mean that the low-level driver (i.e. CPU) will read the data and not the RDMA device. This means that the L_Key won't be checked, actually those memory buffers don't even have to be registered and they can be reused immediately after **ibv_post_send()** will be ended. Valid only for the Send and RDMA Write opcodes”

As described above, simple answer is that

**“PAYLOAD of a WRITE/WRITE_WITH_IMM/SEND request are sent by host (not RNIC) along with the request command”**

Note that Send Inline is not a new command, but flag that changes responsibility of PAYLOAD transfer.

## What is benefit of SEND Inline?

Because of the command (or wqe) is followed by the payload rightaway, HW does not need to execute DMA operation for payload, which is harmful on latency. As a result, the latency (especially small size of payload) is minimized. Our hardware provides threshold of 1KB, which means less than 1KB payload size are scope of SEND Inline flag.

<div>

</div>

## [Overview](https://mangoboost.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/RT/pages/edit-v2/118981274#Overview) (Fig)

Key points

**\[Basic Flow\]**

\(a\) CMD Fetch Engine identifies whether this CMD has INLINE Flag or not. Then, it receives PAYLOAD directly through SQ (Submission Queue) and schedule to proper ways

\(b\) Requester skips to get MR and violation check, and also skips desc generation (for PAYLOAD)

\(c\) After packet is generated, Requester frontend utilizes “User bit” signal to mark it as INLINE

\(d\) Requester backend identifies where to fetch PAYLOAD (from INLINE FIFO or QDMA)

**\[Re-transmission\]**

\(a\) When CMD Fetch Engine receive INLINE CMD, it initializes addresses where the PAYLOAD reside in (i.e., some entries of SQ) – The proper header value of SQ/length of PAYLOAD are written by kernel driver

\(b\) Since inline bit in TX_info is stored, Requester frontend recognizes INLINE CMD. But, if it is not the first packet generation, it generates descriptor to fetch PAYLOAD from the SQ

\(c\) User bit is changed off in this case

<div>

<div>

An Overview of SEND INLINE mechanism

</div>

</div>

## Kernel & User driver support

## Hardware support
