# [On-boarding] Implement your toy example on RDMA project

<!-- id=126747747 parent=32080200 -->

### Objective: Understand basic workflow of HW development

In this section, you will learn about the basic workflow we use in HW development. This includes (1) SystemC coding, (2) verification with VCS, (3) bitstream generation with vivado GUI, and (4) system test using perftest.

- Step 0 : [<u>Get used to SystemC HLS</u>](https://mangoboost.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/HDM/pages/8159286)

  - Before step (1), you should first become familiar with SystemC.

  - We are using Catapult HLS. The SoC Team made a library(SoC-infra) for us to use catapult HLS easily. 

  - This can be done parallel with step 1 or 2.

<!-- -->

- Step 1 : Implement toy module

  - In this step, you will implement a toy module named “new_rx_arbiter_in”

    - Actually, we have this module in our project. (= rx_arbiter_in)

    - **<span style="color: rgb(255,86,48);">So please don’t look at the reference code! You have to design this module all by yourself for your training.</span>**

  - **(1) Implement new_rx_arbiter_in**

    - You should implement this module under

      - ** RDMA/ips/rdma_top/sub/rdma_core/sub**

    - Input: AXI stream, tdata=512bit, tid=1bit, tlast, tkeep

      - For remaining part, we call this structure as axis_512_1

      - Input stream for “any kind of valid” network packet (e.g., RDMA packet, TCP packet, UDP packet, etc.)

    - Output: 5 axis_512_1 stream, and they are:

      - Output stream for non-RDMA packets

      - Output stream for “entire” RDMA request packet 

        - This stream should be forwarded to “responder_writer”

      - Output stream for RDMA request packet’s header

        - No data payload, header only

        - This stream should be forwarded to “responder_frontend”

      - Output stream for “entire” RDMA response packet 

        - This stream should be forwarded to “completer_writer”

      - Output stream for RDMA response packet’s header

        - No data payload, header only

        - This stream should be forwarded to “completer_frontend”

    - About AXIS protocol (AXI-Stream) <a href="https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/ug1399-vitis-hls/How-AXI4-Stream-is-Implemented" data-card-appearance="inline">https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/ug1399-vitis-hls/How-AXI4-Stream-is-Implemented</a>

      - We use tvalid, tready, tdata, tkeep, and tid

        - Actually, tid is meaningless in rx_arbiter_in (= you can just forward it)

    - Some hints

      - How can you differentiate between RDMA packets and non-RDMA packets?

      - How can you differentiate between RDMA request packets and RDMA response packets?

  - **(2) Synthesis your module**

    - 1\) cd to ips/rdma_top/sub/rdma_core/sub/new_rx_arbiter_in/fhls

    - 2\) Type `do.hls.make_hlsenv`

      - This will generate Makefile, hls.cfg, hls_run.tcl

        - Open hls_run.tcl, and fill out below two parts.

          - `export MODULE_NAME := new_rx_arbiter_in`

          - `export PREFIX := NEW_RX_ARBITER_IN`

    - 2\) Write down your pmap file - you can refer to pmap file of tx_arbiter_in

    - 3\) run `make clean; make wrap`

    - 4\) Then the v file will be generated under `ips/rdma_top/sub/rdma_core/sub/new_rx_arbiter_in/fvsrc.`

  - **(3) After you implement your module, you should pack the module into IP for further use.**

    - You can use ippack script or just type **make sysc_ip_rdma**

      - `cd ippack/script/`, and run `./ippack.sh new_rx_arbiter_in ../../ u55c core`

  - **(4) Apply your new_rx_arbiter_in in our project.**

    - \(1\) Build a project by following the instructions described in README.

      - You should run below commands

        - \(1\) `make sysc_ip_rdma`

        - \(2\) `make sysc_ip_onic`

          - \(1\) and (2) can be done in parallel.

        - \(3\) `make project IMPL=0 TAG=<tag>`

          - **<span style="color: rgb(255,86,48);">Note: This command may fail with the error message that some of IPs do not exist on the IP repository. In this case, you can repeat step (1) ~ (2).</span>**

    - \(2\) Open the project with vivado GUI

      - Move to build/\<your_project\>, and run `vivado rdma.xpr`

    - \(3\) Open the block design (rdma_full_bd), and find the rx_arbiter_in (you can easily search it with ctrl+F)

    - \(4\) Right click on the block design, and click Add IP

    - \(5\) Search new_rx_arbiter_in and insert it on the block diagram

    - \(6\) Replace rx_arbiter_in with your new_rx_arbiter_in, and connect the corresponding ports

    - \(7\) Validate the block design, and save it (ctrl-s)

      - <div>

        </div>

    - \(8\) Export the block design

      - In Vivado GUI, click File \> Export \> Export Block Design

      - You should save the block design file in `onic/src/box_250mhz/vivado_ip/<DEV>/rdma_full_bd_top_<DEV>.tcl`

      - **<span style="color: rgb(255,86,48);">Note that you should manually put below lines at the end of tcl file, like line 3965~3979</span>**

      - <div>

        </div>

<!-- -->

- Step 2 : Verify your design with VCS

  - After you build the toy module above, the next step will be verification of your module.

  - In the RDMA project, we use VCS for verification, which enables us to simulate end-to-end RDMA tests.

  - Follow the README file on our RDMA repo to build a VCS environment. You should run:

    - \(1\) `make vcs_lib`

      - This will generate library file on vcs/vcs_lib

    - \(2\) `make vcs`

      - \(1\) and (2) can done in parallel.

    - \(3\) `make export_sim`

  - You should run all tests, including

    - normal path test

      - \(1\) `cd scripts/vcs_script`

      - \(2\) `./vcs_all_user.sh`

        - Test results will be generated in vcs/test_user\_\<testcase\>

    - retransmission test

      - \(1\) `cd scripts/vcs_script`

      - \(2\) `./vcs_retrans.sh`

        - Test results will be generated in vcs/test_retrans

  - You may learn how to debug your module by looking at the waveform.

    - To find the waveform file, move to vcs/test\_\<your test\> and type `verdi rdma.fsdb`

<!-- -->

- Step 3 : Verify your design with system test

  - Once all RTL-level verification is done, the next step is testing your design on the system.

  - You should generate your bitstream file that includes your toy module.

    - Assuming you have already replaced rx_arbiter_in with new_rx_arbiter_in, just type

      - `make project IMPL=1 TAG=<tag> DEV=u55c GIG=100G LANE=x16`

      - This will generate the bitstream file with tcl mode.

  - How to test?

    - To be updated
