# How to test your bitfile

<!-- id=130712153 parent=130744832 -->

## Prerequisites

rdma-test (<https://github.mangoboost.io/MangoBoost/rdma-test>)

- Hand-written RDMA applications (mainly used for corner-case checks such as misaligned data buffer, etc.)

mango-rdma-test (<https://github.mangoboost.io/MangoBoost/mango-rdma-test>)

- Testbench that internally utilizes perftest benchmark.

perftest (<https://github.mangoboost.io/MangoBoost/perftest>)

- De-facto microbenchmark in RDMA domain. Can evaluate various parameter/opcode configurations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Node configurations](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1lzCK76S0kL4S_LweIb0tySwpJcQFF4tLGikm6JFaRRs/edit?pli=1#slide=id.p)

We use four nodes for testing (test13, test14, test15, test16)

Each server is equipped with below devices.

- test13: CX

- test14: CX + U55C (not working now)

- test15: CX + U55C

- test16: CX + U55C + U50

Normally, we pair one CX node and one MB node for testing (e.g., test13 - test16, or test14 - test16).

And all nodes are connected through [network switch.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1op-WhdHXZAGYBSpOj4UMI8kJ2A6N_LX19Yi2UgEoQ6o/edit?pli=1#heading=h.ja5zbk25jnlc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Test environment

For easy testing (and sharing), we use tmux for testing. Most tmux sessions are built in

<div>

</div>

's account, and you can access this session by typing below commands.

<div>

<div>

bash

</div>

<div>

sudo su \# Assuming you are in sudoers su kanghyun.choi \# Login to @Kanghyun.choi's account tmux ls \# Check the name of your tmux session tmux attach -t \<tmux_session_name\> \# You can use tmux a -t \<tmux_session_name\> as shortcut

</div>

</div>

Every collaterals are included under `/home/kanghyun.choi/test_rdma` .

Directory structure of ~/test_rdma looks like:

<div>

<div>

Directory structure

</div>

<div>

- drivers/

  - mango-drivers/

    - Going to be maintained with up-to-date kernel driver.

    - Currently <https://github.mangoboost.io/changyeon-jo/mango-drivers/tree/latest>

  - rdma-core/

    - Going to be maintained with up-to-date user driver.

    - Currently <https://github.mangoboost.io/changyeon-jo/rdma-core/tree/latest>

  - \<your_name\>/

    - If you want to develop/use your own custom driver, please locate it under \<your_name\>/.

- tests/

  - rdma_test/

    - Going to be maintained with up-to-date commit.

  - rdma-test-all.sh

    - Test all rdma-test scenarios.

  - mango_rdma_test/

    - Going to be maintained with up-to-date commit.

  - performance.sh

    - Used when you measure the maximum performance of your bitfile.

- scripts/

  - load.sh

    - This script will insert all kernel modules related to MB-RDMA.

  - unload.sh

    - This script will remove all kernel modules related to MB-RDMA.

  - download.sh

    - This script will download bitstream file specified in jfrog link.

  - rxe_load.sh

    - This script will remove RDMA-related mlx5 drivers and expose Softroce (rxe) interface on top of CX. (so that you can use this interface for packet dump purpose)

  - XX_program.sh

    - This scripts are used when you program your bitfile onto FPGA.

    - 13_program.sh:

      - Use to program u55c in test16 (since JTAG cable is connected to test13)

    - 14_program.sh:

      - Use to program u55c in test15 (since JTAG cable is connected to test14)

    - 16_program.sh:

      - Use to program u50 in test16

  - \<your_name\>/

    - If you want to develop/use your own custom script, please locate it under \<your_name\>/.

- bitfile/

  - Will contain any RDMA bitfiles

- tcpdump/

  - Contains packet-dump-related scripts.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Before test

You should build / install appropriate drivers to test your bitfile. If there are some mismatch between your hardware and drivers, the hardware may malfunction or even entire system may hang.

Below sections describes how-to for bitfile testing. We assume you have already logged in to

<div>

</div>

's account.

## Program your bitfile

<div>

<div>

\# Download your bitfile first cd ~/test_rdma/ \# You can just type \`cdr\` as a shortcut cd scripts ./download.sh \<your bitfile name\> \# Open prgramming scripts vim XX_program.sh \# Depending on your test pair/device, choose XX. (XX= 13, 14, 16) ./XX_program.sh \# ssh to the node where your target FPGA device resides ssh 10.2.1.\<XX\> sudo reboot now \# To check availability of your target server, you may optionally ping 10.2.1.\<XX\> \# ssh to the target node ssh 10.2.1.\<XX\>

</div>

</div>

## How to build/install kernel driver

<div>

<div>

bash

</div>

<div>

\# Build kernel driver cd ~/test_rdma/drivers/mango-drivers \# You can also move to your custom driver's path cd src make clean; make mango_aux_rdma -j16 \# Load your kernel driver cd ~/test_rdma/scripts ./load.sh \# Before you type this, please look at the IP address in the script.

</div>

</div>

## How to build/install kernel driver

<div>

<div>

bash

</div>

<div>

\# Build user driver cd ~/test_rdma/drivers/rdma-core \# You can also move to your custom driver's path cd src dpkg-buildpackage -b -rfakeroot -kkanghyun.choi@mangoboost.io -d \# Install your user driver cd ../ sudo dpkg -i \*.deb \# You don't have to repeat this process everytime. Once you type this command, the user-driver will be installed as a package which means it will remain unless you change the user-driver.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Testing

## rdma-test

<div>

<div>

cd ~/test_rdma/tests/ ./rdma-test-all.sh \<target ip address\>

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## mango-rdma-test

<div>

<div>

cd ~/test_rdma/tests/mango-rdma-test/ cd perftest ./run.py -s \<scenario\> \<target ip address\>

</div>

</div>

Currently, we use below scnearios.

- basic

  - Very simple testset used for verifying very-basic functionality of MB-RDMA.

- dev

  - More coverage than basic testset.

- dev_zero

  - Includes zero-length operation tests.

- dev_srq

  - Includes RDMA send testset using SRQ (shared receive queue)

- dev_inline

  - Includes RDMA testset that sets SEND_INLINE flag in send WQE.

- events

  - Includes RDMA testset that uses notify_cq.

- basic_rdmacm

  - Same coverage with basic test, but uses RDMA-CM for initialization process.

- dev_rdmacm

  - Same coverage with dev test, but uses RDMA-CM for initialization process.

<div>

<div>

Note: If you want to run rdmacm tests, then you need to do below processes in advance.

Even if we use CX-CX pair, we need to do the same thing.

<div>

<div>

\# At the server side (CX side) ib_write_bw -R \# At the client side (MB side) ib_write_bw -R \<target ip address\> \# Here, only client side will termniate without any results. \# At the server side ctrl + c \# To terminate server instance ib_write_bw -R \# Re-run server instance \# At the client side ib_write_bw -R \<target ip address\> \# Now, perftest will run correctly.

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Performance test

<div>

<div>

cd ~/test_rdma/scripts ./performance.sh \<target ip address\>

</div>

</div>

Above script will automatically report the performance with each testcase commands.

However, due to warm-up time in perftest, the result may not be line-rate bandwidth. In this case, you should run the testcase manually to check the actual performance of given testcase.

Note that you may have to use `taskset` to remove possible NUMA effect on performance. For instance, you can run something like:

`taskset -c 0 1,2,3 ib_write_bw -s 4096 -Q 1 --run_infinitely --report_gbits -D 1 -F 1 <target ip address>`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Tips

## Perftest and its options

Perftest is a de-facto benchmark used in RDMA domain to measure various performance metrics (e.g., bandwidth, latency).

Supported testbenches are:

- `ib_write_bw`: Measure RDMA write bandwidth

- `ib_read_bw`: Measure RDMA read bandwidth

- `ib_send_bw`: Measure RDMA send bandwidth

- `ib_write_lat`: Measure RDMA write latency

- `ib_read_lat`: Measure RDMA read latency

- `ib_send_lat`: Measure RDMA send latency

There are many options in perftest, and here we summarize some of widely used options.

<div>

<div>

bash

</div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

============================================================================================================================== \`Below are options that are applicable to any of testcases.\` \# -b : Bidirectional test. To get real performance, you need to take an average of throughputs that are reported in both side. \# -d : Specifies which IB device to use. Only used when there are multiple RNIC interface within a single node. \# -D : Duration. When solely used, the test will terminate after \<value\> seconds. If used with --run_infinitely option, it will report the metric every \<value\> seconds. Note that perftest will terminate after \<value\> seconds, without checking the completion of inflight requests. \# -F : Remove CPU frequency mismatch warning. Included in most cases. \# -I : Maximum size of inlined payload to be sent. WQE will set SEND_INLINE flag in this case. \# -l : Post-list. Specify the length of work request chain (e.g., if value is 8, then only one doorbell will be used to post 8 WQEs.) \# -n : Specifies the number of exchanges for given testcase. Perftest will terminate only after all \<value\> WQEs are successfully completed. (Default = 5000, at least 5) \# -N : Cancel peak-bw calculation. Used when -n or datasize is large, to reduce execution time. Note that the time complexity of peak-bw calculation is N^2, so it will take long time. \# -p : Specify which port to be used. \# -q : Specify the number of QPs to be used. \# -Q : CQ moderation. It will set singaled bit on WQE once per \<value\> WQEs (= generate CQE only after \<value\> completions). Note that with default -Q value (100), then our RNIC cannot show the line-rate performance for now. \# -R : Use RDMA CM for QP connection. Both QPs for data exchange and QPs for key exchange will be created via rdma cm. \# -s : Specify the message size to be exchanged. (Default = 65536) \# -t : Depth of tx_queue (Default = 128). Note that our hardware only supports 64 depth queue (larger depth is supported through SW-based queue.) \# -u : Specify QP timeout (Default = 14). \# -z : Used RDMA CM for key exchange QP establishment. QPs for data exchange are not created through rdma_cm (they are created via TCP connection.) \# --run_infinitely : Run test forever, report results every \<duration\> second. \# --report_gbits : Report bandwidth in Gbits/second \# --reversed : Reverse traffic direction - Server will send to client. \# --mr_per_qp : Create memory region for each QP, rather than sharing. Note that perftest tries to create MR whose size is \<# of qp sharing this MR\> \* \<message size specified by -s option\> \* 2. ============================================================================================================================== \`Below are options that are only applicable to some tests\`. \# Only used in write test \# --write_with_imm : Specify that given ib_write\_ testbench will use immediate data \# Only used in send test \# -c : Connection. Supported options = UD / RC (default RC). Note that UD QPs only support send packets. \# -r : Depth of rx_queue (Default = 512). Note that our hardware only supports 64 depth queue (larger depth is supported through SW-based queue.) \# --recv_post_list : post-list for receive WQEs. \# Only used in read test \# -o : Number of outstanding read/atomic requests. Since ConnectX only supports -o up to 16, we need to specify this value in test option when MB acts as a client. \# Used in both send/read test \# -e : Sleep on CQ events. If specified, use notify_cq instead of polling.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How to dump packets using tcpdump

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Troubleshooting
