# Local/Remote Invalidation

<!-- id=155844886 parent=111706815 -->

**\[Local MR Invalidation\] 관련 내용**

<div>

</div>

- Valid → Free state 하는거래

- lkey, rkey 필요 하데

- Memory locations that have been registered multiple times will be represented  
  by multiple Memory Regions. The invalidation of single Memory  
  Region prevents HCA access to those memory locations via the L_Key  
  (and accompanying R_Key if any) associated with that Memory Region.  
  Access to the memory locations via L_Keys and R_Keys associated with  
  other Memory Regions is not affected.  
  **--\> 몬소리냐**

**o10-37.2.13:** If the Base Memory Management Extensions are supported,  
the CI must:

1.  Local Inv WQE and SEND WITH INVALIDATE

2.  Reg MR 로 등록된, Re-REGMR 로 등록된, Shared MR 로 등록된 거 invalidate X

3.  return an error if an invalidation operation is attempted on a Memory  
    Region that was used as an input modifier to a successful Register  
    Shared Memory Region;?  
    • support independent invalidation of partially or completely overlapping  
    Registered Memory Regions.?

- **--\> 몬소리냐**

**\[Error Conditions 에 관하여\]**

**o10-37.2.14:** If the Base Memory Management Extensions are supported,  
Work Requests or Remote Operation requests that are in process  
and actively referencing memory locations in a Memory Region that is invalidated  
must fail with a protection violation.

**→ Invalidate 된 MR 에 접근해 사용하고 있는 WR도, pd check에서 에러떠야함**

**o10-37.2.18:** If the Base Memory Management Extensions are supported,  
Work Requests or Remote Operation requests that attempt to access  
memory locations in a Memory Region that has been invalidated  
must fail with a protection violation.

**→ 이미 invalidate 된 MR에 접근 하려는 WR 는 pd check 에서 에러 떠야함**

**o10-37.2.15:** If the Base Memory Management Extensions are supported,  
Work Requests that attempt to invalidate a Shared Memory Region  
must fail with a Memory Management Operation Error.

**→ Shared MR 은 Invalidate 될 수 없다. by Local INV**

**o10-37.2.16:** If the Base Memory Management Extensions are supported,  
incoming Send with Invalidate operations that attempt to invalidate  
a Shared Memory Region must fail.

**→ Shared MR 은 Invalidate 될 수 없다. by Remote INV**

**o10-37.2.17:** If the Base Memory Management Extensions are supported,  
local and remote invalidation of a Memory Region must fail if the  
Memory Region still has Memory Windows bound to it.

**→ MW bound 되있으면 invalidation 시킬 수 없다. by local/remote**

<div>

</div>

**\[Ordering 에 관하여\]**

- Relaxed Order 와 Strongly Ordered 가 있음  

**o10-37.2.19:** **Relaxed ordered** - The invalidate operation may take place  
at any time after it has been posted to the Send Queue but must take  
place before a completion is generated and before any subsequent WQE  
has begun execution.

**→ completion 만들어지기 전에 invalidate 되야함?**

**o10-37.2.20:** If the CI supports Local Invalidate Fencing: **Strongly ordered**

- The Invalidate operation must take place after all preceding WQEs on  
  the same Send Queue have completed and before the next WQE (immediately  
  after the Invalidate) on the same Send Queue begins execution.

**→ 이전의 I/O 들이 모두 완료되야함 → completion ?**

**o10-37.2.21:** For incoming Send with Invalidate - The operation may take  
place anytime between the reception of the message and the completion  
of the message. The invalidate operation must be performed after all previous  
non RDMA Read messages have completed processing. The Invalidate  
operation does not have any ordering with subsequent messages  
that target the same connection. Note, subsequent messages that target  
the same connection may execute partially or completely before the invalidation  
takes place.

**→ Remote Invalidate 는 ack/response 를 받고 처리중에 아무때나 받을 수 잇기 떄문에, 실제**

**invalidation 은 non-READ 인 경우를 모두 처리한 후에 수행되어야 한다?**

**Invalidation operation 자체는 뒤에 오는 packet을 처리하는것에 상관없이 동작해도된다?**

Note, when an outbound Send with Invalidate operation completes at the  
local CA, there is no guarantee that the Remote Invalidate completed successfully  
at the remote CA. However, when a **Send Data Received** is returned  
through a Work Completion and the Send operation was a Send  
with Invalidate, the (incoming) Invalidate is guaranteed to have been completed.

**→ 그냥 Ack 이 오면, invalidate 가 됫다는거라는걸 안다는건가**

**o10-37.2.22:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
then for **Non-Shared PMRs** the CI must support Relaxed Invalidation  
Ordering and does not have to support Local Invalidate Fencing.

**→ Non-shared PMR 에 대해서, relaxed ordering은 반드시 지원해야하며, fencing은 반드시가 아니다**

**o10-37.2.23:** If the CI supports Local Invalidate Fencing, then for Non-  
Shared PMRs the CI must support:

- Strong Invalidation Ordering when the Consumer sets the Local Invalidate  
  Fence on an Local Invalidate WR; and

- Relaxed Invalidation Ordering when the Consumer does not specify  
  the Local Invalidate Fence on an Local Invalidate WR.

**→ user 가 local invalidate fence를 설정하면, strong order 를 지켜야한다**

**→ user 가 local invalidate fence를 안하면, relaxed ordering 한다.**

**o10-37.2.24:** For Non-Shared PMRs, if the Responder CI supports the  
Base Memory Management Extensions and the R_Key check fails on an  
incoming Send with Invalidation operation, then at the Responder:

- the R_Key must not be invalidated;

- the incoming Send with Invalidate must generate a Completion Error,  
  and

- the associated QP must be placed in the Error State.

→ responder에서 R_key check 실패하면, (1) invalidate 할 수 없고, (2) completion error 를 내야하고

\(3\) QP는 error state 로 빠져야한다.

Q. Rkey 는 통과하고, MW 가 bound 되잇으면?

**\[SEND QUEUE ORDERING RULES 영역\]**

**o10-53.2.3:** If the HCA supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
the invalidate operation may take place at any time after it has been  
posted to the Send Queue, but must take place before a completion is  
generated and before any subsequent WQE has begun execution.  
**o10-53.2.4:** If the HCA supports Local Invalidate Fencing, when the Local  
**Invalidate Fence Indicator** has been set in a Local Invalidate Work Request,  
the Send Queue shall not begin processing that Work Request  
until all prior Work Requests on that Send Queue have completed. Additionally,  
the Send Queue shall not begin processing the Work Request  
immediately after the Local Invalidate Work Request, until the Local Invalidate  
Work Request has finished processing.

**→ Invalidate Fence 는 indicator 가 있고, 이거 보고 동작하며, strong order 지킨다는 내용**

The Local Invalidate Fence Indicator can be used to guarantee in-order  
semantics. If the Memory Region referenced by the Local Invalidate is in  
use at the time the Local Invalidate operation is posted, the HCA may Invalidate  
the Memory Region. To prevent this from occurring, if the HCA  
supports fencing on Local Invalidate, the Local Invalidate Fence indicator  
can be set on the Local Invalidate operation. Setting the Local Invalidate

Fence indicator on the Local Invalidate will assure all previous WQEs on  
the same Send Queue that reference the Memory Region being Invalidated  
have completed before the Invalidate operation takes place.  
Ordering guarantees for processing and completion notifications exist  
only between Work Requests submitted to the same queue. The ordering  
across multiple Work Queues is undefined.

**\[Type 2 Memory Window\]**

**o10-37.2.28:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions  
defined in this specification, the CI must support Type 2 Memory  
Windows.

**→ BMME 지원하면, Type 2 MW 지원해야함**

**o10-37.2.29:** If an HCA supports **Type 2A Memory Window**, then it must  
provide the following semantics for a Type 2A MW:

- Post Send Bind WRs are allowed if the Type 2A MW is in the Free  
  state and the QP performing the Bind WR is associated with the  
  same PD as the PD associated with R_Key referenced in the Bind  
  WR.

**→ QP and BIND WR PD check 해야함**

- Invalidate operations are allowed if the Type 2A MW is in the Valid  
  state and the QP Number (QPN) of the QP performing the Invalidate  
  operation matches the QPN associated with the Bound Type 2A MW.  
  Invalidate operations are also allowed if the Type 2A MW is in the  
  Free state and the QP performing the Invalidate operation is associated  
  with the same PD as the PD associated with the R_Key referenced  
  in the Bind WR.

**→ MW 의 bind QPN 이랑 실행하는 QP랑 맞아야함**

**→ PD check 해야함**

- MW access operations (i.e. RDMA Write, RDMA Reads, and Atomics)  
  are only allowed if the Type 2A MW is in the Valid state and the  
  QP Number (QPN) of the QP performing the MW access operation  
  matches the QPN associated with the Bound Type 2A MW.

**→ operation 들이 QP 랑 bind 된 MW 만 사용가능하네**

- A QP can be destroyed or placed in the Reset State only if it has no  
  Type 2A MWs associated with the QP.

**→ Type 2A MW 가 bind 되 있으면 destroy 할 수 없다.**

**이게 Type 2B 네**

**o10-37.2.30:** If an HCA supports Type 2B Memory Window, then it must  
provide the following semantics for a Type 2B Memory Window:

- Post Send Bind WRs are allowed if the Type 2B MW is in the Free  
  state and the QP performing the Bind WR is associated with the  
  same PD as the PD associated with R_Key referenced in the Bind  
  WR.

**→ bind MW 와 QP 의 PD 가 같아야 함**

- Invalidate operations are allowed if the Type 2B MW is in the Valid  
  state and the QP Number (QPN) and PD of the QP performing the Invalidate  
  operation matches the QPN and PD associated with the  
  Bound Type 2B MW. Invalidate operations are also allowed if the  
  Type 2B MW is in the Free state and the QP performing the Invalidate  
  operation is associated with the same PD as the PD associated with  
  the R_Key referenced in the Bind WR.

**→ QP’s QPN == MW’s QPN,**

**→ QP’s PD == MW’s PD**

- MW access operations (i.e. RDMA Write, RDMA Reads, and Atomics)  
  are only allowed if the Type 2B MW is in the Valid state and the  
  QP Number (QPN) and PD of the QP performing the MW access operation  
  matches the QPN and PD associated with the Bound Type 2B  
  MW

→

- A QP can be destroyed or placed in the Reset State, even if it still has  
  Type 2B MWs associated with it.

**→ QP destroy 는 그냥 가능하네, 독립적으로**

**o10-37.2.31:** If an HCA supports the Base Memory Management extensions,  
the HCA shall support either Type 2A or Type 2B MWs, but not  
both.

**→ Type 2A 이거나 Type2 B 이거나**

**o10-37.2.32:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions  
defined in this specification, the R_Key format for a Type 2 Memory  
Window must consist of:

- 24 bit index in the most significant bits of the R_Key, which is owned  
  by the CI, and

- 8 bit key in the least significant bits of the R_Key, which is owned by  
  the Consumer.

**\[R_KEY 관련 RUle 인거 같은데\]**

**o10-37.2.33:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
each time a given Type 2 Memory Window is bound through the  
Post Send Bind Memory Window Work Request, the CI shall use the key  
value provided by the Consumer for the bind operation. After the bind operation  
completes, the R_Key must consist of the 24 bit index associated  
with the Type 2 Memory Window and the 8 bit key supplied by the Consumer  
in the Post Send Bind Memory Window Work Request.

→ BIND를 post_Send 로 때리고, R_key 24비트를 받고, 8 비트는 ?

**o10-37.2.34:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
the CI must return an error (either an immediate error or a completion  
error) if the Consumer attempts to use a Type 1 MW R_Key on a Post  
Send Bind Memory Window Work Request (i.e. on a Type 2 MW).

**→ Type 1 R_key 던지면 에러?**

**o10-37.2.35:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
the CI must return an error (either an immediate error or a completion  
error) if the Consumer attempts to use a Type 2 MW R_Key on a Bind  
Memory Window verb (i.e. on a Type 1 MW).

**→ Type 1 MW 에 Type 2 MW R_key 쓰면 에러?**

When a Type 2 Memory Window is bound through the Post Send Bind  
Memory Window Work Request, the CI does not return the R_Key. Note:  
it is the Consumer's responsibility to remember the R_Key index generated  
by Allocate Memory Window and construct R_Key values for transmission  
to the remote Consumer by combining the 24 bit index and the  
Consumer-chosen 8 bit key.

For correct operation, a Consumer must ensure that no remote agent attempts  
to use a new R_Key before its associated binding has been completed  
by the HCA. One technique to accomplish this is for the Consumer  
to submit the Bind operation to the same Send Queue it uses to send the  
message that conveys the new R_Key to the remote agent.

**o10-37.2.36:** Any Work Request posted to a Send Queue subsequent to  
a Post Send Bind WR shall not begin execution until the Post Send Bind  
WR completes. Local Invalidate WRs posted subsequent to a Post Send  
Bind WR are an exception (see section 10.8.3.3 Send Queue Ordering  
Rules on page 557).

**→ Post Send Bind 하고 끝난다음에, SQ 쓸수잇음**

Note, when an outbound Send with Invalidate operation completes at the  
local HCA, there is no guarantee that the Remote Invalidate completed  
successfully at the remote CA. However, when a Send Data Received is  
returned through a Receive Work Completion and the incoming Send operation  
was a Send with Invalidate, the (incoming) Invalidate is guaranteed  
to have been completed.

→ ???

**\[Ordering Rule\]**

**o10-37.2.37:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
then the CI must support Relaxed Invalidation Ordering for Type 2  
MWs.

**o10-37.2.38:** If the CI supports Strong Invalidation Ordering, then for Type  
2 MWs the CI must: support Strong Invalidation Ordering, and provide an  
Local Invalidate Fence bit for the Consumer to choose between Relaxed  
or Strong Invalidation Ordering on Local Invalidates.

**o10-37.2.39:** For a Type 2 MW, if the CI supports the Base Memory Management  
Extensions and the R_Key check fails on an incoming Send with  
Invalidation operation:

- the R_Key must not be invalidated;

- the incoming Send with Invalidate must generate a Completion Error,  
  and

- the QP must go to the Error state.

**o10-37.2.40:** For a Type 2 MW, if the CI supports the Base Memory Management  
Extensions and the Consumer attempts to Invalidate a Type 2  
Memory Window through either the invocation of a Bind Memory Window  
or a Post Send Bind WR with a length of zero, the CI must return an error.

**→ Bind 로 지우기 불가능 Type2는**

**o10-37.2.41:** If the CI supports the Base Memory Management Extensions,  
the CI shall support multiple Type 1, Type 2, or both Type 1 and  
Type 2 Memory Windows bound to the same Memory Region, each with  
independent remote access rights, and their associated areas shall be allowed  
to be overlapping or disjoint.

**→ 교집합 가능 Type1 and Type 2**

<div>

</div>
