# UET-CC, basic introduction

<!-- id=162759072 parent=162759062 -->

UET-CC is not intended for WANs, as it assumes a low latency control loop (1us ~20us)

Congestion Management can be decomposed into the following components:

- Telemetry

  - determining the congestion state of network paths, locally on the endpoint and the network; this information may be collected at and/or used by the initiator, switches along the path, or target.

- Sender-based window

  - Controlling the maximum outstanding, unacknowledged data, as measured in bytes

- Receiver-credited Congestion Control

  - Controlling the rate at which data may be transmitted to a specific receiver to more directly control incast

- Multipath Path Selection

  - Modifying the path packets take to minimize congestion using adaptive packet spraying with a granularity of spraying at the packet level

UET-CC should work with existing switches, however, switch should support below basic features

- Switch should classify traffic and provide independent queueing based on CoS, where

  <div>

  S

  </div>

  is assigned based on IP DSCP or PCP (VLAN)

- Switch should provide ECN marking

However, UET-CC may improve if switch can support Packet trimming. (more than packet trimming is not required in current UET specification)

- UEC endpoints SHOULD support packet trimming. But it is OPTIONAL for UE switches

- ECN is REQUIRED in switches

UET-CC also considers supporting multipathing through the use of adaptive packet spraying

In particular, short-term imbalance (transient unfairness) in bandwidth or latency  
between connections is less important than tail latency. → UEC needs to provide at least a moderate level of fairness (not strict fairness)

===

About telemetry

- ECN (REQUIRED for both UE endpoints and switches)

  - Use IP header’s ECN field. Others are similar to that of RDMA’s.

  - Set ECN-CE flag on the dequeue (What is the difference?)

    - It reflects much more up-to-date indication of network congestion

- RTT (Round trip time)

  - Uses latency as an indication of the level of congestion.

  - Sending Reverse-path (e.g., ACK, NACK) packet is recommended to use higher priority traffic class

    - To avoid reverse path congestion being misinterpreted as forward path congestion

  - To avoid receiver-ack delay being misinterpreted, receiver is REQUIRED to measure this delay and report it in ACK packets as SERVICE_TIME. → Sender can subtract this time from measured RTT.

    - SERVICE_TIME is specified in units of 128ns. (in our case, 32 cycle?)

- Endpoint Congestion State

- TRIM (REQUIRED for UE endpoints, but OPTIONAL for switches)

  - Rather than drop packets in case of insufficient switch buffer, it “trims” incoming packet and forwards to receiver with higher priority. Receiver side can trigger fast retransmission rather than relying on timeout mechanism at the client side.

  - UET sprays packet across many paths, resulting in reordering. This complicates loss detection, as the simple arrival of a higher sequence number cannot be used to infer loss. Trim can mitigate this problem.

  - Question: Difference between ECN and TRIM?

  - TODO: Read the remaining part - details of Trim

- PFC (Priority Flow Control)

  - Same concept as before

  - Assume that PFC is not enabled on switch-to-switch links in the network, but endpoint-to-switch is allowed.

- CBFC (Credit based flow control)

  - More fine-grained than PFC?

  - <https://www.ieee802.org/1/files/public/docs2014/new-dcb-tabatabaee-CBFC-issues-0514.pdf>

    - PFC allows sharing buffer among different port & traffic class, while CBFC inhibits buffer sharing for different port & traffic class.

UET-CC traffic class (TC)

- UET-CC is designed to operate using two Traffic Classes (TC) where each TC is provided independent packet buffering, ECN marking, trimming, and scheduling services from other TCs.

- UET packets is mapped to a TC based on DSCP (IP header), and DSCP is assigned based on the “packet type” and network configuration (lossless, best effort)

UET-CC Protocol operation overview

- UET targets backend-datacenter - which shows much lower & predictable latency, higher bandwidth for end-hosts, and many more available paths between a sender and a receiver

- Commonly consist of synchronized collectives that aim to run on a network with many redundant paths at close to 100% load, while caring mostly about the final completion time within a group collective

- Network topologies: such as fat-tree where, in the absence of failures, there are many routed path from a sender to a receiver and they are all of equal length and capacity

  

CC information is in optional headers in PDS

- Without this, nothing in CC spec is possible
