# Packet Delivery Sublayer

<!-- id=198378057 parent=162726259 -->

Packet delivery sublayer is the part of UET protocol responsible for delivering packets over IP/Ethernet network. PDS offers reliability and ordering capabilities.

Targeting minimal viable product, this document focuses on AI-base (or minimal) profile, which only requires RUD/ROD/UUD PDS modes.

Below figure describes overall terminology used in this section.

<div>

</div>

- FEP: Fabric Endpoint (corresponds tp RNIC?)

- SES: Semantic sublayer

- PDS: Packet Delivery Sublayer

- Initiator / Target: PDS uses ephemeral connection (similar to RDMA DC QPs). Initiator means the endpoint which “initiates” the connection, and target means the endpoint which "accepts” the connection.

  - Ephemeral means, connection is dynamically created and closed.

- Forward direction: Initiator → target

- Return direction: Target → Initiator (only used for large-size read response)

<div>

</div>

The overall flow is done with below steps.

1.  SES Request generated by FEP-A SES

2.  Initiator generated PDS Request carries ‘SES Request’ to Target

3.  SES Request passed to FEP-B SES

4.  SES Response to this request generated by FEP-B SES

5.  Target generated PDS ACK carries ‘SES Response’ to Initiator

6.  SES Response passed to FEP-A SES

PDC

- Packet Delivery Context. I think this corresponds to QPs in RDMA.

  - Comprises TX states and RX states (e.g., next sequence number, ACK bitmap, ACK state for guaranteed delivery..) for forward direction. Also there are second set of TX / RX state for return direction

  - Two different psn space (just like RDMA QP)

  - A single PDC is limited to a single mode

- More than one PDC between a pair of FEPs MUST be supported

  - No guarantee on ordering across packets associated with different PDCs

- Packets of a single SES message must be transferred in same PDC

- No message interleaving within a PDC

PDS Request

- Generated by PDS and transmitted over Ethernet fabric to PDS on another FEP; all of these carry SES Requests and SES Response with data (in return direction)

  - SES Response with data is basically read data. When the data size is larger than certain threshold (MAX_ACK_DATA_SIZE), it is sent via PDS Request instead of PDS ACK

  - Note that single read request packet is limited to requesting a maximum of 1 MTU. (splitting is done in SES layer)

- At the target side, PDS Request is limited to (1) Read response or (2) Control packet

PDS ACK

- Only carries SES Responses which are delivered to the SES at destination

  - SES response may carry data (e.g., read data or atomic)

- Congestion control is not applied to PDS ACKs (unlike HPCC?)

- There is concept of “guranteed delivery” - that is, requester side should (directly or indirectly) notify responder that it successfully received the ACK

## PDS delivery modes

- Reliable, Unordered Delivery (RUD)

  - Packets are delivered to the semantic layer in the order they arrive from the network

  - Assumes selective retransmission and direct data placement out-of-order

- Reliable, Ordered Delivery (ROD)

  - Not the same, but similar to RC QPs

  - Packets are transmitted in packet order (in-order delivery), and must use single network path

  - Use Go-back-N retransmission

  - No ordering requirements between PDS ACKs in forward direction and read responses on the return direction

- Reliable, Unordered Delivery of Idempotent operations (RUDI)

  - Does not use PDC, ACK

  - RMA write / read (the results remain even operation is processed multiple times)

  - Only required in HPC profile

- Unreliable, Unordered Delivery (UUD)

  - Does not use PDC

  - Not controlled by UET-CC → traffic class should not be the same with RUD/ROD traffics since it may impact performance of RUD/ROD traffic

## PDC establishment

PDC is created dynamically on demand. The protocol is defined to allow PDC creation to occur without incurring a round-trip delay (unlike TCP/RDMA).

- Initiator allocates an Initiator PDC Identifier (IPDCID) as part of PDC creation

  - PDCID 0 is reserved (like QP 0?). Utilized by NACK when a valid PDCID in unavailable

- PDC establishment is notified by SYN flag bit, in PDS Request (This can contain SES Request). Before receipt of target-side response, SYN flag is set for all packets sent from initiator.

  - At most MPR_RANGE packets can set SYN flag

    - MPR_RANGE is somewhat similar to queue depth?

    - If packet with psn higher than starting_psn + MPR_RANGE and the SYN flag is set, NACK with code = UET_INVALID_SYN is returned

  - Before receipt of response, initiator overloads DPDCID field with {PDC_INFO, PSN_OFFSET}

  - PDC_INFO

    - Indicates whether PDC is from reserved pool or general pool. But reserved pool is optional (and seems it is for INC purpose)

  - PSN_OFFSET

    - Offset from starting psn

    - Initiator starting psn is pseudo-random, and at least 2^16 far from last PSN used on that PDC

      - Which means, last psn should be stored when PDC is closed?

    - Target sets starting psn for return direction to same starting psn as the forward direction

      - PSN is independent for forward/return direction, but start at the same psn.

Below figure describes how PDC is established with SYN flag.

<div>

<div>

PDC establishment

</div>

</div>

## PDC close

A PDC is closed for multiple reasons, including (1) resource shortage and (2) PDC has been idle for a configured amount of time. Termination can be triggered from both initiator and target, but must be controlled by initiator only.

- When close is triggered by target, (1) PDS ACK with FLAGS.REQ field set to Close Request or (2) **Close Request** control packet is used.

When initiator triggers PDC close,

- After completing all messages in progress (including receiving return data for all outstanding read requests), transmit PDS control packet of type “Close command”

  - Close command implicitly clears all PSNs, and allocated unique PSN

  - Once target receives Close command, there should be no active PSN outstanding on the return direction

- Wait for PDS ACK (sent from target) for Close command, and close the PDC and free resources once this is arrived

When target triggers PDC close,

- Target sends “Close Request” control packet, and initiator send Close command in response to Close Request.

- Remaining steps are the same

Below figure describes closing process.

<div>

</div>

## PDC header format

There are several types of PDC headers, such as

- Entropy

- RUD/ROD request

- RUD/ROD ACKs

- RUD/ROD ACK with CC

- RUD/ROD ACK with CC extension

- RUD/ROD Control packet

- RUDI Request/Response

- NACK

- UUD Request

Below are details of header fields

- Entropy header

  - Only (and must be) used when UET run directly over IPv4 / IPv6 (no UDP)

  - 32bit, upper 16 bit is for entropy which is used by fabric switches for path selection

  - If UDP used, then source port is used for entropy, checksum = 0. UDP dest port MUST be configured through API (Don’t know how)

- PDS prologue

  - Type, NEXT_HDR or CTL_TYPE, FLAGS

- RUD/ROD Request Header Format

  - <div>

    </div>

  - CLEAR_PSN_OFFSET

    - Encoding of CLEAR_PSN relative to PSN. This field is a sequence number used to acknowledge reception of PDS ACKs

  - PSN

    - Packet sequence number assigned to the PDS Request

  - SPDCID / DPDCID

    - Source/Destination PDC ID. Simiar to QP_num

- RUD/ROD Acknowledge Header Format

  - <div>

    </div>

  - ACK_PSN_OFFSET

    - Encoding of ACK PSN relative to CACK_PSN. This field is a sequence number from the packet which triggered the generation of the ACK packet

  - CACK_PSN

    - Cumulative Acknowledgement Packet Sequence Number - all PDS Requests with PSN prior and including this PSN are acknowledged. On the forward direction, this includes all PSN prior and including this PSN which require a clear have been cleared.

- RUD/ROD ACK with CC state (= Extended ACK)

  - <div>

    </div>

  - CC_TYPE

    - The contents of CC state field - used to support multiple CC algorithm

  - MPR

    - Maximum PSN range - used to set a maximum window on source PDC

  - SACK_PSN_OFFSET

    - Encoding of base SACK_PSN relative to CACK_PSN

    - Base SACK_PSN defines the lowest PSN in the SACK bitmap

  - SACK_BITMAP

    - Selective ACK bitmap \[PSN+1.. PSN+64\]

- RUD/ROD Control Packet Header Fromat

  - <div>

    </div>

  - All Control packet type must be supported.

  - CTL_TYPE:

    - 0: NOOP

      - Allocated unique PSN, and [FLAGS.AR](http://FLAGS.AR) set (destination must generate ACK) - no other processing required at destination. CP payload = 0

      - Can be used to open a PDC. It is the only control packet that uses SYN flag. Other must not be used to open a PDC

    - 1: ACK Request

      - Intended to recover lost ACKs when using ROD/RUD. Requests an ACK for a specific PSN as identified by the PSN in the CP header. CP payload should carry the message ID associated with the requested packet (but it can be invalid → then fill with 0?). [FLAGS.AR](http://FLAGS.AR) should be set to one to indicate the destination MUST generate an ACK

        - Source sends the ACK Requect Control path to the destination.

        - ACK Request should be generated when the SACK bitmap and CACK indicates a guaranteed delivery response is missing and when a trimmed ACK is received with FLAGS.REQ indicating a clear request. The exception is when the associated packet is a read request of size \<= MAX_ACK_DATA_SIZE

        - If the missing response is associated with a read request of size \<= MAX_ACK_DATA_SIZE then the original packet using that PSN MUST be retransmitted. The target does not save read data so the initiator must reissue the read

    - 2: Clear

      - Source sends to destination when there is no PDS Request packet available to carry a required Clear. For example, there is no outstanding but received ACK indicates clear. Also sent in response to a Clear Request CP.

      - CP payload should be set to CLEAR_PSN. [FLAGS.AR](http://FLAGS.AR) must be cleared to zero (must not be acknowledged). PSN should be 0

    - 3: Clear Request

      - Destination sends to source when there are ACKs requiring clear. This CP may be sent based on local resource limitations (e.g, limited resources for storing guaranteed delivery responses) to free-up storage of non-default responses.

      - CP payload should be set to the PSN requring clear. [FLAGS.AR](http://FLAGS.AR) must be cleared to zero (must not be acknowledged). PSN should be 0

    - 4: Close Command

      - Initiator sends to target to indicate the PDC is being closed

      - Must be allocated a new PSN (specifically the next PSN in the PDC PSN space)

      - [FLAGS.AR](http://FLAGS.AR) bit set to one

      - CP payload should be 0

    - 5: Close Request

      - Target sends to initiator to request initiator close the PDC

      - Must be allocated a new PSN (specifically the next PSN in the PDC PSN space)

      - [FLAGS.AR](http://FLAGS.AR) bit set to one

      - CP payload should be 0

    - 6: Probe

      - Used to collect congestion control information

    - 7: Credit

    - 8: Credit Request

      - For congestion control purpose (e.g., RCCC)

- NACK

===== Here! ====

PDS configurations

- CRC_PKT_SIZE

  - 이것보다 작은 size의 pkt은 CRC를 안씀

- LIMIT_PSN_RANGE

  - Set 되면 starting_psn + 2^31이면 멈춤

  - 이거는 encryption 이 켜져있을때만인가?

- DEFAULT_MPR_RANGE

  - 1.1.10.5

  - 약간 inflight 같은 느낌인가?

- MAX_ACK_DATA_SIZE

  - SES response로 올 수 있는 read data의 최대 사이즈

- TRIMMABLE_ACK_SIZE

  - optional. skip → maximum ACK MTU보다 크게 잡으면 됨

  - Trimmable DSCP?

- ACK_MODE

  - 1.1.10.2 check 해야됨

- ACK_ON_ECN

  - true일 때 ECN marked 되어있으면 ack gen. False이면 ECN marked가 ack gen 기준에 영향 X

- ENB_ACK_PER_PKT

  - true면 per-packet ack

  - coalescing에 대한 rule은? 1.1.10.2 참고해야될 듯

- ACK_GEN_TRIGGER

  - ACK_GEN_COUNT가 이 값을 넘으면 ack generated

    - 1.1.10.4.1

- ACK_GEN_MIN_PKT_ADD

  - ACK_GEN_COUNT에 더해지는 최소 크기 (when received)

    - 1.1.10.4.1

- RTO

  - retransmission timer

- MAX_RETX_CNT

  - retransmission exceeded counter

  - 1.1.10.7

- MAX_NACK_RETX_CNT

  - optional

- PDS_CLEAR_TIMER

  - optional

- (MAX)\_TAIL_LOSS_TIMER

  - optional

default response? (guaranteed delivery 말고 나머지인가?)

- Most packets are processed successfully, and the initiator only needs to know success for these

- If an error occurs on a multi-packet message, it is only necessary to report that error to the source on one of the packets. That is, sending the error response for every packet is not strictly required.

- Clear can be used to guarantee an error response is received.

Packet processing 할 때 expected window 밖에 있는지 확인해봐야된다

=======

\[Fields\]

PSN

CLEAR_PSN

SACK_PSN

- ACK

SES request / response

- Lower case used to distinguish these terms from Next Headers used in the Semantic Section?

  - SES request to transmit a packet using a PDS Request

  - SES response to be relayed using a PDS ACK - these may be coalesced under specific circumstances or PDS Request (on return direction)

SES Request / SES Response (this is header type??)

- SES Request is generated by SES and passed to PDS to request delivery of packet with specified ordering and reliability service; only initiator can issue these. Relayed to destination SES using PDS Request

- SES Response is generated by SES at receiver and passed to PDS in response to receipt of an SES Request - these may be carried in PDS ACKs or PDS Request

- SES Return data is generated by SES and passed to PDS to request delivery of packet carrying read response data on specific ROD or RUD PDC in the return direction

  - FWD PDCID와 같아야 함 (Read request)

차이는 딱 SES Response with data 인듯
