# Semantic Sublayer

<!-- id=200179723 parent=162726259 -->

<div>

</div>

**The objective of UET’s semantic layer is to provide high performance and highly scalable messaging to enable specialized AI and fully featured HPC deployments.** The SES bridges between the user-facing libfabric API and the PDS by mapping libfabric API calls to a set of UET communication operations, such as tagged and untagged send/receive, RMA read/write, and atomics. Also, it provides optional message ordering, and various optional initiator or target completion notifications (e.g., global observability, and others).

The SES layer translates libfabric communication calls into messages that transmit data from or to buffers at the initiator or target process, respectively. It transmits transactions as messages utilizing PDS functionality by packetizing messages and mapping packets into messages at the destination. Note that UET does not intend to achieve compliance with any existing semantics (neither IBTA nor Portals 4) and shall interoperate only with a peer UET device.

The SES layer defines two protocols for (large-)message transmission: **rendezvous** and **deferrable** send.

- The rendezvous protocol is used for messages that exceed the available temporary eager buffer limit at the target. The target then waits (“rendezvous”) until the receiving process has posted a matching receive and then triggers a read from the source.

- The deferrable send protocol simply sends messages of any size and a target that cannot receive it yet sends a message to stop the sender. Later, once the buffer is posted, the target sends a resume message to continue the transaction.

- The main difference is that with the rendezvous protocol, a sender decides before sending the message whether it is sending it using an eager or a rendezvous transaction while the deferrable send behaves the same at the sender and the receiver reacts dynamically and defers the send if the receive has not been posted and the message cannot be buffered.

SES supports two fundamental addressing types: **relative addressing** for peer-to-peer communication in large compute jobs and **absolute addressing** for client-server connections. Once a message endpoint is identified, a buffer is selected with optional matching criteria (based on a packet-carried initiator ID, e.g., an MPI rank and additional match bits).
