# Semantic Protocol Sequences

<!-- id=200179993 parent=200179723 -->

In this section, lossless networks (as noted in the PDS specification) use the “request” traffic class (TC) for green and purple arcs, while the blue and orange arcs use the “response” TC. Similarly, in lossy operation, the solid arcs use the payload TC while the dotted arcs use the control TC. In some figures, two PDCs are used: a forward direction PDC (green requests with blue responses) and a reverse direction PDC (purple requests with orange responses). Green request/completion arcs are shown in the interaction between libfabric and the SES for initiator to target messages, and purple request/completion arcs are shown in the interaction between libfabric and the SES for target to initiator messages.

## Single Packet Requests with Payloads

<div>

</div>

A single packet request has a single packet response (UET_DEFAULT_RESPONSE) where the semantic ACK is combined with the PDS ACK. The PSN from the PDS ACK is used to identify the original request.

The Modified Length is equal to the Requested Length, indicating that the entire message is delivered. Note that the Requested Length means the length of the payload to be transferred, while the Modified Length indicates the amount of payload that will be delivered to the memory as part of processing the message. Thus, again, ‘request length == modified length’ represents that the delivered payload has changed the buffer state as intended.

In this flow, UET_DEFAULT_RESPONSE SHOULD be used (as illustrated), but UET_RESPONSE MAY be used (not shown). The semantic layer MUST NOT return the semantic response to the PDS before the packet has been processed through the semantic layer. If delivery complete is set (DC=1), the semantic response MUST NOT return until the payload has been made globally observable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Multi-Packet Requests with Payloads

<div>

</div>

The UET_NO_RESPONSE opcode indicates that the packet has been received, but that the semantic processing is not yet complete. It is allowable for many packets to generate a UET_NO_RESPONSE opcode. In conformance with the requirement that at least one semantic response be generated, a later packet – arriving after semantic processing has completed – generates a UET_DEFAULT_RESPONSE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Requests with Responses that have Payloads

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

There are two mechanisms for returning data – as illustrated in Figure 1-21 and Figure 1-22. The choice between the two flows is based on the value of PDS_MAX_ACK_DATA (maximum data size that a single ACK can carry). When PDS_MAX_ACK_DATA is greater than the request length or PDS_MAX_ACK_DATA is greater than the Payload MTU, then the flow in Figure 1-22 is used. Otherwise, the flow in Figure 1-21 is used.

🧐 This part is hard to understand. We should delve into this later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Rendezvous Transactions

Rendezvous transactions have two parts. The first part consists of the eager send (e.g., UET_RENDEZVOUS_SEND). The eager send has 0 or more bytes of payload as indicated by the eager size in the rendezvous header. The second part is a “rendezvous read” message (UET_READ) that completes the transfer by pulling the data. The rendezvous read is an ordinary read transaction using the fields provided in the rendezvous header.

<div>

</div>

Notionally, the eager size is set to cover the round-trip bandwidth delay product, so that the first packet of the read request arrives “just in time” to start the read payload transfer. There are two completion points at the initiator of the transaction: the completion of the rendezvous send and the completion of the read.

<div>

</div>

Figure 1-24 illustrates the unexpected message variation for the rendezvous transaction. The difference between the two flows is limited to two features.

- First, the modified length in the response is intended to truncate the eager portion of the message to the part that is buffered at the target. In the figure, it is assumed that the target buffer is matched to the size of the eager portion; however, a modified length could be shorter (often 0 bytes). In that case, the UET_RENDEZVOUS_SEND is completed with a single additional packet – just like the deferrable send transaction.

- Second, the start location of the read transaction differs from the expected case. When the message is unexpected, the read starts from the point in the message that has been buffered at the target.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deferrable Send Transactions

The Congestion Management Subsystem is expected to limit the outstanding payload based on the current congestion state. This means that approximately one BDP of data at the current achievable bandwidth should be outstanding when a response returns from the target.

<div>

</div>

the deferrable send (UET_DEFERRABLE_SEND) finds that the matching buffer is available at the target. This causes a semantic response (UET_DEFAULT_RESPONSE) indicating RC_OK and a modified length equal to the request length. The deferrable send proceeds as any normal send.

<div>

</div>

In the transaction illustrated in the figure above, the semantic ACK (UET_RESPONSE) indicates that the message is to be deferred by setting the return code to RC_OK and the modified length to 0. This response is marked for guaranteed delivery, since it does not use the default set of response values.

Later, a restart token (8,675,309) is used to restart the message using UET_DEFERRABLE_RTR. In the illustrated example, the target has chosen to buffer J bytes of the original message. Thus, the ready to restart (RTR) message indicates that the restart should start at message offset J. The restarted message MUST be delivered to the matching buffer that was provided. The target MUST remember J using some mechanism (see Implementation Note), since it is not carried in the restarted message.

A second notable feature in this figure is that the first message for the unexpected deferrable send MUST be completed using a packet with EOM set. This allows the target to deallocate state associated with that message.

<div>

</div>

In this scenario, the target does not reserve the buffer when a matching buffer is posted. This means that a deferrable send can be started, deferred, restarted, and redeferred.

🧐 I will leave the other scenarios, including additional unexpected message sequences, for later.
