# Definition of Semantic Concepts

<!-- id=200179843 parent=200179723 -->

A **transaction** is composed of all of the packets needed to eventually deliver the payload desired by the user and implement the libfabric request. A **message** consists of a set of packets sharing a single message ID. A transaction consists of one or more messages and supporting packets. The term **operation** is reserved for the behavior implemented at the endpoint. Operation is also used in a handful of cases when referring to libfabric concepts (e.g., a receive operation).

A **service** is a libfabric level construct that encapsulates all of the resources associated with a higher-level library (e.g., \*CCL, MPI). **Resources** can include constructs such as buffers, completion queues, and completion counters.

A **Resource Index** is an addressing construct used to select an addressable set of resources within a service. Three Resource Index spaces exist corresponding to three classes of opcodes: RMA, SEND, and TAGGED. That is, Resource Index 0 for an RMA opcode has a different meaning from Resource Index 0 for a SEND opcode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Addressing

**Addressing** describes the entire process of selecting a target and identifying a data buffer at the target. There are two types of addressing: **Relative Addressing** and **Absolute Addressing**. Both types rely on a Fabric Address (FA), PIDonFEP, and set of Resource Index values to select a libfabric endpoint. They differ in how a PIDonFEP is interpreted. In Relative Addressing, the PIDonFEP is relative to the JobID. In Absolute Addressing, the PIDonFEP is interpreted without a JobID.

The addressing hierarchy begins with a Fabric Address (FA). A FA selects a fabric endpoint (FEP). Once a FEP is selected, two addressing modes are defined.

- Relative Addressing is intended to enable scalable addressing for parallel communication within a distributed application, which is called a job.

- Absolute Addressing is intended to enable scalable addressing for client/server operations where the server is not required to be part of the application.

In both cases, the initiator of a transaction is assigned a JobID that is inserted in each packet in a trusted way. The JobID is an identifying property of the initiator only, and then is used as part of addressing and authorization at the target.

<div>

</div>

In Relative Addressing, the FEP uses JobID to define the scope of the PIDonFEP. Within the PIDonFEP, a Resource Index (RI) is associated with a “service”. A service can correspond to a specific use case or library.

<div>

</div>

It is also possible to implement a simplified version of this hierarchy for more purpose-built use cases (e.g., an integrated FEP in an AI accelerator). As illustrated, a FEP may choose to support only one JobID at a time to effectively remove the first level of indirection. In this model, the FEP is expected to validate that the received JobID is the same as the one JobID using the FEP.

<div>

</div>

Absolute addressing differs from relative addressing in that the PIDonFEP is an absolute number that spans the process space on the target node instead of being relative to a JobID. The JobID at that point 9 is only used as part of authorization to access a buffer.

<div>

</div>

RMA operations (e.g., fi_read() and fi_write()) use an independent Resource Index space from send/receive (and tagged send/receive) operations. At the libfabric level, a target memory region is accessed using a memory key. A Resource Index defines a context within which a memory key has meaning.

### Job Identifiers (JobID)

A JobID identifies an application (spanning one or more FEPs) that a communicating process belongs to. The JobID is assigned to the initiating process and is part of both addressing and buffer access authorization. The JobID MUST be unique for all jobs that are concurrently executing within the reachable network, and it could potentially utilize an existing ID if that is how the provisioning system is designed.

### Process Identification (PIDonFEP)

UET provides a process identification field called PIDonFEP, which is used to select a set of resources associated with a specific process. Since operating systems tend to evolve independently of network protocols, the UET PIDonFEP is decoupled from the OS process ID as well as the PCI Express PASID. The PIDonFEP to OS process mapping is N:1.

### Resource Index

A specific set of resources within a process is a libfabric endpoint. A libfabric endpoint may acquire more than one Resource Index – as defined by the service that was used to open the endpoint. A communication context within that endpoint (e.g., a receive queue) is selected by the Resource Index. Different classes of opcodes (e.g., UET_SEND, UET_READ, and UET_TAGGED_SEND) have different Resource Index spaces.

### Initiator Identifiers

An initiator field is included as part of the UET header and is part of the matching criteria. The initiator field contains the job level rank of the initiating process. An initiator only has meaning within the context of a JobID (i.e., it is a rank numbered from 0 to N-1, where N is the total number of ranks in the application).

RANK: Processes are the actual instances of the program that are running. MPI allows you to create logical groups of processes (job), and in each group, a process is identified by its rank. This is an integer in the range \[0, N-1\] where N is the size of the group.

### Matching and Nonmatching Operations

In the Message Passing Interface (MPI), **tag matching** is the process of pairing sent messages with their corresponding receive operations. Each message in MPI is characterized by

- a communicator,

- a source rank,

- a destination rank,

- and a user-defined tag.

For a message to be successfully received, these attributes must match between the sender and receiver. This mechanism ensures that messages are delivered to the correct destination, even in complex communication patterns.

When the message indicates it is a tagged send (e.g., UET_TAGGED_SEND, UET_RENDEZVOUS_TSEND), the match criteria (using MPI_ANY_TAG or MPI_ANY_SOURCE) are used for buffer selection. When matching is not requested (e.g., UET_SEND or UET_RENDEZVOUS_SEND), a network message selects the next buffer provided by the Resource Index. The matching (if present) and nonmatching resources associated with a Resource Index are logically separated.

### Memory Addressing Offset

The UET header provides an offset within the buffer selected through the above processes. The offset is zero based (wrt. the buffer start) and matches the default memory region behavior for libfabric .

### Addressing Summarized

- For untagged operation, a given {JobID, PIDonFEP, Resource Index} tuple MUST be used to select one buffer. If the message uses a tagged operation, the FEP uses the match bits as part of selecting a buffer.

- In matching operation, a given {JobID, PIDonFEP, Resource Index, Match Criteria} tuple MUST be used to select one buffer; however, the FEP MAY use one or more mechanisms to uniquely identify that buffer. The mechanism used MAY depend on the {JobID, PIDonFEP, Resource Index} tuple.

- An RMA operation MAY include a memory key in the same header field used for match bits. If a memory key is not used, the {JobID, PIDonFEP, Resource Index} tuple MUST uniquely select one buffer.

- Note that the Resource Index space used for untagged operations, tagged operations, and RMA operations are three separate spaces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Authorization

### JobID Authorization

The JobID MUST be assigned by or validated by a trusted layer within the initiating node. This can be within the FEP or OS – if the OS is part of the network trust boundary for a given deployment. The JobID can be assigned in any way that the provisioning system sees fit. For every access to a buffer (either RMA memory region or receive buffer), the implementation MUST apply a mechanism to validate that the JobID is allowed to access the buffer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Network Transaction Types

Network transactions include various forms of tagged and untagged sends, RMA operations, and atomic operations. Not all transaction types may be supported on all networks.

Network transactions that carry bulk payload (i.e., reads, writes, sends, tagged sends) MAY transfer up to 2^32 – 1 bytes (4GB – 1) in a single message. This message size limit is defined by the maximum value that can be represented in the request length in the standard header format.

### Sends — Tagged and Untagged

All sends cross the wire with addressing information – JobID, PIDonFEP, Resource Index, an optional offset into the target buffer, matching criteria, header data, and a payload.

Sends select the head of the untagged receive queue addressed by the {JobID, Process ID, Resource Index} and Tagged Sends use the matching criteria to choose one of the buffers associated with the tagged receive queue selected by {JobID, Process ID, Resource Index}.

### Write & Read

A Write crosses the wire with addressing information – JobID, PIDonFEP, Resource Index, an offset into the target buffer, an optional memory key (RMA addressing may work in either of two formats – one with and one without a memory key on the wire), header data (immediate data) and a payload.

A Read utilizes the same addressing information as a write.

### Atomic operations

Atomic operations are defined within UET. Both fetching atomic and non-fetching atomic operations are included. Atomics utilize the same addressing semantics as RMA read and write.

**Fetching atomic operations** perform an atomic action on a memory location and return the original value before the operation. This allows a thread to retrieve the current value while simultaneously updating it, ensuring consistency without race conditions. Common examples include:

- Fetch-and-Add: Atomically adds a specified value to a variable and returns the variable's original value.

- Compare-and-Swap (CAS): Compares the current value of a variable to an expected value and, if they match, swaps it with a new value, returning the original value.

- Fetch-and-OR: Performs a bitwise OR operation on a variable with a specified value and returns the original value.

**Non-Fetching Atomic Operations:** Non-fetching atomic operations update a memory location atomically but do not return the previous value. They ensure that the update occurs without interruption, maintaining data integrity in concurrent environments. Examples include:

- Atomic Store: Writes a value to a variable atomically without returning the previous value.

- Atomic Increment: Increases the value of a variable by a specified amount atomically, without fetching the original value.

- Atomic Bitwise Operations: Performs bitwise operations (AND, OR, XOR) atomically on a variable without returning its prior state.

### Rendezvous Send Transactions

<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">READ triggered by SEND</span>

A rendezvous send transaction is defined as an operation that sends a request from an initiator to a target. On successfully identifying a buffer, the target then “pulls” the data from the initiator by RMA READ operations. The initial request MAY have an “eager” portion of data that is transferred with it. Eager transfers are payload transfers before the buffer has been identified at the target.

In UET, a rendezvous transaction begins with a rendezvous request (send or tsend). The rendezvous request includes information about a buffer at the initiator. This information is a full set of addressing information to enable the read to later retrieve the remainder of the full message payload.

### Deferrable Send Transactions

A deferrable send is a separate type of send transaction (for send or tsend) that can be deferred by the target of the send. Deferrable sends can then be resumed later. The target responds with a semantic response indicating whether the message was accepted or not. If the message was not accepted in its entirety, a later request from the target to the initiator – a ready to restart – uses a token to indicate to the initiator that the original message can be restarted.

### Responses

Two types of responses are defined. The first is a response to Send, Tagged Send, Write, Read (for large reads), and non-fetching Atomic operations, which indicate the semantic result of that operation. The second is a response with payload, which is returned as the result of a Read or Fetching Atomic operation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Target Operation Types: Supported Buffer Behavior

### Use-Once Operation

This behavior means that once a single message has targeted the buffer, the buffer MUST NOT be accessible by other messages. The buffer MUST continue to be available for the one operation that started on it. The buffer MUST NOT be released back to the application (e.g., through a completion notification) until the operation targeting it has completed. Target side FEP implementations MUST support Use-Once behavior since this is the defined behavior for fi_send()/fi_recv(). If tagged messaging is supported, target side FEP implementations MUST support Use-Once behavior as part of the tagged API implementation.

Target side FEP Implementations of RMA (fi_read()/fi_write()) MAY implement a Use-Once semantic.

### Multi-Receive

Target side FEP Implementations SHOULD implement support for a multi-receive capability. Multi-receive allows a single buffer to accept multiple requests with a locally managed offset “until it is full”.

### Tagged Operations

The target side of an implementation of libfabric over the HPC profile for UET MUST include support for tagged operations.

### Memory Key Size and Range

Target side FEP implementations MUST support using the match bit field of a packet as a memory key for an RMA operation (e.g., fi_write()). The structure of the memory key is not defined as part of the transport definition and is defined in the libfabric mapping specification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Ordering

Two basic forms of ordering are defined in libfabric. One is the ordering between libfabric messages, and the other is payload ordering.

### Libfabric Message Ordering

Message ordering as defined by libfabric (e.g., send-after-send, send-after-write) requires that message headers be resolved at the target (e.g., matched or consume a receive queue entry) in the order that the messages were provided by software at the initiator. That is, message ordering begins with the order in which API calls (e.g., fi_send()) are made from software at the initiating libfabric endpoint and ends when a buffer has been selected.

Payload may be delivered out-of-order by using rendezvous transactions or deferrable send transactions. In these transactions, the initial message (i.e., eager portion) is sent using a ROD PDC, and the remainder (e.g., the rendezvous read) is a separate message that may use a RUD PDC.

### Payload Ordering

Payload order refers to the ordering that two different operations from the same initiating PIDonFEP from a given initiator FEP perceive when accessing the same buffer associated with a single target FEP. Common ordering modes include write-after-write (WAW), write-after-read (WAR), and read-after-write (RAW).

### Order of Generation of Packets within a Message

Packets of a single message are generated with packet sequence numbers (PSNs) and offsets within the message that are ascending through the message. That is, the first packet of the message MUST have the first sequence number (e.g., PSN=A) used for the message and MUST have the SOM bit set. The Nth packet MUST have PSN=A + N-1; thus, in the logical interface from the semantic sublayer to the PDS, packets are provided in order.

From the perspective of generating packets within a message, deferrable sends can behave like one message (i.e., when they are not deferred), in which case they follow single message packet generation ordering rules.

### Completion Ordering

The UET semantic layer does not directly provide completion ordering. Completion ordering is a function of the FEP – and the hardware/software interface of the FEP.

### Ordering of Response Data

For the ROD protocol using Go-Back-N, a read response (UET_RESPONSE_W_DATA) MUST be generated in the order that the read requests were received for a given PDC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Protocol Isolation Mechanisms

The UET Semantic layer provides mechanisms for isolation between jobs on a system. This consists of controlling access to buffers using device-enforced identities. A FEP is validated as being within a given security domain using either cryptographic methods or other site-specific methods beyond the scope of UET. In a client/server environment, however, this does not indicate which buffers a message may access. Buffer access authorization depends on the identify information in a UET header being properly enforced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Header Data

<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">Immediate in RoCE</span>

Libfabric defines completion data that can have a size up to 64 bits. UET supports this with a field called Header Data that is 64 bits in size. In libfabric, completion data is delivered as part of the completion queue entry and does not consume an entry from the receive queue. Header data is only provided in the start of message packet, and only if the HD bit indicates that it was provided by software.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Packet Sizes based on Payload MTU

Packets for the UET semantic layer utilize a programmable payload MTU. The payload MTU is the amount of payload (in bytes) that can be carried in a maximum sized packet. The payload MTU is configured (out-of-band) to a value of 1024, 2048, 4096, or 8192. The default for payload MTU is 4096 bytes, and this size is used for various architectural decisions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Zero Byte Operations

Zero byte operations are supported for read, write, send, tagged send, and the atomic put and atomic get operations. Zero byte reads and atomic gets issue a memory read at the target using the specified offset. Zero byte writes, sends, tagged sends, and atomic puts do not write memory, but can generate a completion at the target.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Interaction of Semantics with Reliability Modes

The packet delivery sublayer (PDS) has four delivery modes (ROD, RUD, RUDI, UOD).

1.  **Reliable Ordered Delivery (ROD):** Ensures packets are delivered in sequence, maintaining strict order. This mode is ideal for applications that require ordered message transmission.

2.  **Reliable Unordered Delivery (RUD):** Provides reliable packet delivery without enforcing order. It can tolerate out-of-order delivery within the network, making it suitable for operations where strict ordering isn't essential.

3.  **Reliable Unordered Delivery for Idempotent Operations (RUDI):** Optimized for idempotent operations (<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">Idempotence refers to operations that can be performed multiple times without additional effects after the first execution</span>), such as certain RDMA read and write tasks. This mode ensures reliable delivery without order enforcement, accommodating operations that can handle repeated executions without adverse effects.

4.  **Unreliable Unordered Delivery (UUD):** Offers packet delivery without guarantees of reliability or order. This mode is suitable for scenarios where applications implement their own reliability mechanisms or can tolerate potential packet loss and out-of-order delivery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Message Identifiers and Message Construction

Each multi-packet message contains a message identifier (message ID). Single packet read request (UET_READ) messages using the standard header (Figure 1-6) MUST include a message ID. Other single packet requests MAY include a message ID, or MAY set the message ID to 0xFFFF. The message ID MUST be unique across all messages in flight from one initiator FEP to a given target FEP using a given target PDC. The message ID MAY be globally unique for a given initiator FEP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Original Request PSN

Certain optimized header formats for RMA operations do not carry a message ID. These formats use the PSN from the original PDS Request packet to identify the original request state at the initiator.
