# Memory Placement Extensions (MPE)

<!-- id=217808945 parent=32211017 -->

This document describes the Infiniband Memory Placement Extensions (MPE) specified in the IB 1.5 & 1.6 specification.

<div>

<div>

none

</div>

</div>

## Glossary

- **Global Visibility (GV)**: Ensuring the placement of the preceding data accesses in the indicated memory region is visible for reading by the responder platform. The point that guarantees the data is visible & consistent for other consumers’ accesses (other connections, host processor).

- **Persistence (=Durability)**: Ensuring the placement of the preceding data accesses in the indicated memory region is persistent and the data will be preserved across power cycle or other failure of the responder platform.

- **Flush**: Submitting of previously written data from volatile intermediate locations for subsequent placement, in a persistent and/or globally visible fashion.

## Background

### Motivation of PMEM

<div>

</div>

Persistent memory (PMEM) is a solid-state, high-performance, byte-addressable memory device that resides on the memory bus. Its location allows PMEM to have DRAM-like access to data, providing nearly the same speed and latency as DRAM while offering the nonvolatility of NAND flash. NVDIMM (nonvolatile dual in-line memory module) and Intel 3D XPoint DIMMs (also known as Optane DC persistent memory modules) are two examples of persistent memory technologies.

- Traditional storage latency is ~10μs due to:

  - Round trip time (RTT)

  - Interrupt overheads

  - Memory management and processing

  - Operating system calls

- Persistent Memory (PMEM) technologies are reducing latency to ~500ns:

  - Time spent on RTT and interrupts becomes unacceptable and unnecessary

  - PMEM storage should be exposed directly to RDMA access to meet performance goals

As PMEM is byte-addressable and attached to the memory subsystem, data can be transferred to the final persistence domain with minimal CPU involvement using RDMA. With PMEM, storage is now connected to the memory subsystem and can be directly accessed via RDMA.

<div>

</div>

- RPMEM (RDMA with PMEM) improves Replication Latency

- Writing to remote PMEM with RDMA is ~8x lower latency than writing data to a remote SSD using RDMA

<div>

</div>

- Extremely low software overhead

- No CPU involved in data transfers, pure HW datapath

### Background to Understand Global Visibility & Persistence

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

In PCIe communication, a **Transaction Layer Packet (TLP)** is a component used for data transfer between devices. TLP is managed by the Transaction Layer of the PCIe architecture, which is responsible for creating and handling various types of data transactions. Below are the key features of TLP.

- **Structure**: A TLP consists of a header, an optional data payload, and an optional TLP digest. The header contains essential information such as the type of transaction, while the payload carries the actual data if required.

- **Types of Transactions**

  - **Memory Transactions**: For reading from and writing to memory.

  - **I/O Transactions**: For input/output operations.

  - **Configuration Transactions**: For accessing configuration space.

  - **Message Transactions**: For sending signals, such as interrupts and error notifications.

- **Transaction Categories**

  - **Posted Transactions**: These do not require a response, such as memory writes.

  - **Non-Posted Transactions**: These require a response, such as memory reads.

  - **Completion Transactions**: These are responses to non-posted transactions, providing the requested data or status.

This is a simple transport flow after the PCIe operation is sent from the DMA engine.

<div>

</div>

- RDMA Write ensures only that data are delivered to RNIC.

- RDMA Read forces data to be pushed out from RNIC with PCIe Read (8 bytes RDMA/PCIe Read).

- PCIe Read flushes all PCIe Writes to destination (Cache or Memory controller).

- Memory controller ensures that data are moved to memory safely.

- ADR Domain = Asynchronous DRAM Refresh Power Fail Safe Domain

Based on this flow, following figure shows a simple transport flow of RDMA READ from a perspective of system architecture.

<div>

</div>

Applying the concepts of global visibility and persistence, this is what it looks like.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

### Motivation of MPE (Flush, Atomic Write)

<div>

</div>

One of the main purpose of MPE is to adapt RDMA operations to PMEM and the storage systems that can utilize it.

- In order to use PMEM as a storage as well as a memory target of RDMA, RDMA needs a remote guarantee of durability (persistence).

- However, existing RDMA (until IB 1.4) did not provided RDMA Write or Atomics reliability guarantees.

- RDMA Write completion does not guarantee data has reached remote host memory.

- Any guarantees that the data has reached the persistence domain must be implemented by an Upper Layer Protocol (ULP). This requires interrupts, pipeline stalls, adding additional latency to the transaction, and may not be scalable.

<div>

</div>

The best example of how MPE can be utilized is log writing, a technique frequently used in file systems and database (SQL) servers.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

- Latency is critical.

- Need a commit operation after write operation.

  - Log pointer cannot be written (placed) until log data is sucessfully made durable.

  - Log pointer is the validity indicator for the log data.

  - It means that we need to pend log pointer write until to the commit of the log data write. Leads to a pipeline bubble - very bad for throughput and overall latency.

  - You can use an RDMA READ as a commit operation, but this will result in a significant latency increase because you will have to do an RDMA READ for every RDMA WRITE, and the next RDMA WRITE cannot be performed until the RDMA READ is finished.

- Need non-posted operations that can be ordered properly.

  - Special READ that can commit the data and acknowledges it → RDMA Flush

  - Speical WRITE which executes “like a READ” (can commit the data) and can be ordered properly without pipeline stall → Atomic Write

### Motivation of MPE (Verify)

- Data integrity check using hash algorithm can be done at

  - Storage device (e.g. SSD, PMEM)

  - RNIC

  - Other hardware on target platform (e.g. chipset, memory controller)

  - Software (e.g. target CPU)

Applications seeking to verify the integrity of remotely written data often rely on ULP mechanisms to read the data back from remote storage over the network. This process incurs additional latency, consumes bandwidth, and may introduce further integrity verification issues. Moreover, the application might experience pipeline stalls while verifying the data before queueing subsequent writes to the requestor. To address these challenges, Memory Placement Extensions (MPE) introduce new transport operations to get placement guarantees on RDMA WRITE and to offload verification of previously written data.

## Extended Opcode and EOETH

### Extended Opcode

<div>

</div>

- Two new opcodes for generalized transport function classes

  - Get Class (Read like): 11010

  - Put Class (Write like): 11011

- Specific operations are defined in the EOETH (Extended Code field).

- Each opcode may define new headers to follow the EOETH.

### Extended Opcode Extended Transport Header (EOETH)

<div>

</div>

- New 16b opcode space per transport function class.

- Additional fields used for transport handling of extended opcodes of GET and PUT types.

- Response Data Length defines the length in bytes of the return value for GET extended opcodes.

- Offset defines the length in bytes of the already-executed section of the request, for requests larger than a single MTU (field is to be used by the transport layer).

## New Opcodes

- **RDMA Flush (IB_WR_FLUSH)**

  - Flush all previous writes or specific regions, per QP.

  - Global memory flush

    - Provides acknowledgement that volatile writes have made it to Global Visibility (GV).

  - Persistent memory flush

    - Provides acknowledgement that persistent memory writes have made it to the power fail safe persistence domain.

  - Pipelined operation

- **Atomic Write (IB_WR_ATOMIC_WRITE)**

  - Write an aligned 8-byte value atomically.

  - Provides guarantees for remote pointer updates to specified memory.

- **RDMA Verify**

  - **Verify Compute (GET class operation)**

    - Responder calculates responder hash value and returns it back to the requester via RDMA READ response.

  - **Verify Check (GET class operation)**

    - Requester has a present hash value, and sends it to the responder.

    - Responder also computes the hash value, verifies that the two values are the same, and takes the appropriate action.

## RDMA Flush

FLUSH is used by the requesting node to achieve guarantees on the data placement within the memory subsystem of preceding accesses to a single memory region, such as those performed by RDMA WRITE, Atomics and ATOMIC WRITE requests.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

- FLUSH operation is always a single packet message. It consumes a single PSN and MSN.

- Upon receiving a FLUSH operation, responder should execute the FLUSH operation according to FETH and RETH fields and respond with RDMA READ Response of length zero and shall be sent only after successful completion of the FLUSH operation.

- FLUSH execution may be delayed. Therefore, similar to RDMA READ, it is not strictly ordered to subsequent RDMA WRITEs/Atomics.

### Flush to Global Visibility (GV)

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

### Flush to Persistence (PMEM)

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

## Atomic Write

ATOMIC WRITE operation is used by the requesting node to write into the virtual address space of a destination node ordered to the completion of preceding Atomic/FLUSH/ATOMIC WRITE operations at the responder side. ATOMIC WRITE execution updates the underlying memory atomically and only once.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

- An ATOMIC WRITE operation is built upon ATOMIC WRITE request and is responded by an RDMA READ response of length zero.

- The message size must be 8 bytes and is written to a contiguous range of the destination QP's virtual address space, access must be aligned to 8 bytes in both the virtual and the physical space.

- Responder shall ensure the atomicity of committing ATOMIC WRITE towards the responder memory. Responder applications and concurrent QPs shall either see all the new data of the ATOMIC WRITE or the unmodified previous content.

## RDMA Verify

The VERIFY COMPUTE and VERIFY CHECK operations allow the requestor to verify data contents in the responder's memory subsystem from preceding accesses to a single memory region. These operations specify the virtual address space of the destination node and the location for verification. While this range must be contiguous in the virtual space of the memory key, it doesn't necessarily correspond to a contiguous range of physical memory.

- VERIFY COMPUTE & VERIFY CHECK operation execution may be delayed. Therefore, similar to RDMA READ, VERIFY COMPUTE & VERIFY CHECK may not be strictly ordered to subsequent commands. See the ordering table for the details.

- VERIFY COMPUTE & VERIFY CHECK operations operate on a virtual contiguous address range.

- VERIFY COMPUTE & VERIFY CHECK operations requires memory region level access permission and memory region must provide remote read access permission for VERIFY COMPUTE & VERIFY CHECK operations.

### VERIFY COMPUTE

Indicates a requestor hash value is not present and the responder shall calculate the hash value. When the calculation is complete, the responder shall successfully respond with RDMA READ response, returning the responder hash value in the payload.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

If the requestor supplies a VERIFY COMPUTE EOETH opcode: A GET class response containing the responder calculated hash value shall be sent by the responder in order and only after successful completion of the execution of the VERIFY COMPUTE in the responder.

The hash algorithm to be utilized is pre-determined by the requestor and responder at memory registration time and not specified in the VERIFY COMPUTE transport.

#### Transport Flow for VERIFY COMPUTE – Requestor verifies responder calculated hash

<div>

</div>

### VERIFY CHECK

Indicates a requestor hash value is present and the responder shall verify the results. If the responder calculates a matching hash value, it shall successfully respond on RDMA READ response, with no payload data. If the responders hash value does not match the requestor supplied hash value, the responder shall immediately respond with an Operational Error and shall prevent the execution of any further operations on the logical connection.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

If the requestor supplies a VERIFY CHECK EOETH opcode: Upon receiving a VERIFY CHECK operation, responder should execute the VERIFY CHECK operation according to RETH fields and shall be acknowledged only after successful completion of the VERIFY CHECK operation. If responder calculated hash value does not match the requestor hash value, the responder shall return an NAK-Remote Operational Error and break the connection allowing other writes, flushes, and verifies to be queued behind this operation.

The hash algorithm to be utilized is pre-determined by the requestor and responder at memory registration time and not specified in the VERIFY CHECK transport.

#### Transport Flow for VERIFY CHECK – Responder successfully verifies requestor calculated hash

<div>

</div>

#### Transport Flow for VERIFY CHECK – Using RNR NAK

<div>

</div>

#### Transport Flow for VERIFY CHECK - Using Operation In Progress NAK

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

Since VERIFY COMPUTE/VERIFY CHECK operations over large ranges may take significant time for the responder to complete, the responder can use the **Operation In Progress NAK** to prevent the ongoing verify operation from timing out on the requestor's end. In response, the requestor will reset its transport timer, avoiding retransmission due to the extended execution time in the responder. The requestor must not retransmit packets after receiving an Operation in Progress NAK.

#### Transport Flow for VERIFY CHECK – Responder fails to verify requestor calculated hash

<div>

</div>

## Scenarios Where MPE Can Improve Performance

### Scenario: Synchronous Log Writing

A **synchronous log writing system** in SQL Server is a mechanism that ensures data integrity by writing log records to disk before the associated transaction is considered committed. This is crucial for maintaining the ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) properties of a database, particularly the durability aspect, which ensures that once a transaction is committed, it will survive any subsequent system failures.

<div>

</div>

- Shared data is distributed among multiple systems.

- Log files keep track of transactions applied to the data.

- High priority network latency sensitive workload for SQL adaption of PMEM.

- Advantageous to perform consistency checks on log data in-line, pipelined with the remote writes & flushes.

### Scenario: Synchronous Replication

<div>

</div>

- Multiple physical copies of all data are replicated on several systems before the original data is considered Highly Available (HA).

- According to several communication service providers (CSPs): High priority network latency sensitive scenario for data canters adopting PMEM.

- Advantageous to perform consistency checks on replica data in-line, pipelined with the remote writes & flushes.

## Example: Synchronous Log Writing

The persistence of data is a key property by which applications implement transactional behavior. Transactional applications, such as databases and log-based file systems, among many others, implement a “two phase commit” wherein a write is made persistent, and **only upon success**, a validity indicator for the written data is set.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

- Synchronous log writing is a common scenario in log-based file systems.

- Requester host application wishes to send an 8 byte pointer update to PMEM only if the log data (RDMA WRITE 1) was written to PMEM first.

- Requester host application issues a FLUSH operation after RDMA WRITE 1 to force the responder HCA to flush the writes before completing the FLUSH response.

- Without waiting for the FLUSH completion, the requester host application can queue an ATOMIC WRITE operation to update the 8 byte pointer.

- Ordering rules prevent the responder HCA from executing the ATOMIC WRITE until the previous FLUSH has completed.

- This allows the requester host application to queue the RDMA WRITE, FLUSH, ATOMIC WRITE, in a pipelined manner, without waiting for this to be done by ULP, and without stalling the pipeline.

## Feasibility

<div>

</div>

- Flushing Read (Zero Length Read) supported since PCIe Gen 2.

- QDMA also specified Zero Length Descriptor in H2C Steam Engine part.

- <a href="https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg302-qdma/Zero-Length-Descriptor" data-card-appearance="inline">https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg302-qdma/Zero-Length-Descriptor</a>

## Reference

IB Specification Vol 1-Release-1.7-Final-2023-07-11

<a href="https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-talpey-rdma-commit-02.html" data-card-appearance="inline">https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-talpey-rdma-commit-02.html</a>

[Arcadia: A Fast and Reliable Persistent Memory Replicated Log](https://par.nsf.gov/servlets/purl/10413244)

<a href="https://github.com/zhijianli88/rdma-core/tree/rdma-flush-v5/librdmacm/examples" data-card-appearance="inline">https://github.com/zhijianli88/rdma-core/tree/rdma-flush-v5/librdmacm/examples</a>

<https://www.snia.org/sites/default/files/SDC/2016/presentations/persistent_memory/IdanBurstein_RDMA_VERBs_Extensions.pdf>

<https://files.futurememorystorage.com/proceedings/2018/20180808_PMEM-202-1_Burstein.pdf>

<https://www.openfabrics.org/wp-content/uploads/2020-workshop-presentations/202.-gromadzki-ofa-workshop-2020.pdf>

[Intel-RPMEM 2.0 Public.pdf](https://downloads.openfabrics.org/WorkGroups/ofiwg/remote%20persistent%20memory/RPMEM%202.0%20Public.pdf)

[Intel-DDIO-technology-brief.pdf](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/technology-briefs/data-direct-i-o-technology-brief.pdf)

[PCIe-tutorial-part-2](https://ctf.re/kernel/pcie/tutorial/dma/mmio/tlp/2024/03/26/pcie-part-2/)

## Related Papers

[Design Guidelines for High Performance RDMA Systems (ATC'16)](https://www.pdl.cmu.edu/PDL-FTP/Storage/rdma_bench_atc.pdf)

[Characterizing and Optimizing Remote Persistent Memory with RDMA and NVM (ATC'21)](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/atc21-wei.pdf)

[Challenges and Solutions for Fast Remote Persistent Memory Access (SoCC'20)](https://www.pdl.cmu.edu/ftp/NVM/kalia-SoCC20.pdf)

[Correct, Fast Remote Persistence](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.02092)
