# How to Implement

<!-- id=229998774 parent=229998593 -->

<div>

</div>

### Priority Queue and Buffer Correspondence

<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">On devices that support PFC, the transmit interface typically has multiple priority queues (TC queue), while the receive interface of the corresponding device has an equal number of receive buffers. Each queue is associated with a buffer, and these pairs are usually one-to-</span>

We have TX (`packet_mod_fifo`) and RX FIFO (`cmac_rx_in_large`) in cmac_subsystem, which buffer in/out packets through CMAC. These work like a pair of TC queues. Multiple TC support could be touched near future when it is needed.

[Look here for CMAC spec](https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg203-cmac-usplus/RX-Pause-Termination)

<div>

</div>

### Congestion Detection

<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">When a receive buffer on DeviceB becomes congested, indicating that the number of packets in the buffer has exceeded a certain threshold, DeviceB sends a PAUSE frame to DeviceA.</span>

By adding `axis_wr/rd_data_counter` on the aforementioned FIFOs, it is possible to get the buffer’s occupancy. Also, by integrating the PFC modules in `cmac_subsystem`, it is possible to instruct PAUSE frame generation to CMAC with customizable configurations. Using the occupancy information and PFC modules, we can detect the congestion. Once CMAC detects congestion, it forms PAUSE frames and send it to the client.

### Backpressure Signal Transmission & Response from Sending Device

<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">The PAUSE frame, often in the form of a "STOP" command, is sent from DeviceB to DeviceA, instructing DeviceA to stop sending traffic in the corresponding priority queue. Upon receiving the PAUSE frame, the sending device halts the transmission of packets in the affected priority queue. This prevents excessive packet transmission to the congested receive buffer, thereby alleviating the congestion.</span>

When the client receives the PAUSE frame, CMAC delivers a predefined signal to the RDMA core to stop sending packets. In this process, we will block `packet_adapter` in `cmac_subsystem` since this point will affect the TX path quickly, minimizing the time difference between detection and application. Also, it is straightforward to understand as all PFC-related workflow gathers in the same block cluster.

### Queue Recovery (Resume)

<span style="color: rgb(151,160,175);">A PAUSE frame includes the period of pause time being requested, in the form of a two-byte (16-bit), unsigned integer (0 through 65535). This number is the requested duration of the pause. The pause time is measured in units of pause quanta, where each quanta is equal to 512 bit times.</span>

CMAC will do this.
