# MSI-X study

<!-- id=23822539 parent=32080200 -->

date : 23.12.06

reference : [<u>PCI Express Base Specification Revision 5.0 Version 1.0</u>](https://picture.iczhiku.com/resource/eetop/SYkDTqhOLhpUTnMx.pdf)

## What is MSI?

MSI (Message Signaled Interrupts) enables device to request interrupt by writing **specific data value** to **specific address** initialized by system software during device configuration.

MSI-X defines some extensions to basic MSI functionality. The major differences are as follows.

1.  Support larger maximum number of vectors

2.  Software can alias when fewer vectors are allocated than requested (e.g., Function supports 5 queues but allocate only 3 vectors)

3.  Each vector can use independent address and data value using MSI-X Table

MSI and MSI-X use separate and independent Capability structures, and I will focus on MSI-X for this document.

## MSI-X Configuration

We need to understand three structures for MSI-X configuration; (1) MSI-X Capability (2) MSI-X Table (3) MSI-X PBA. MSI-X Table and MSI-X PBA reside at hardware as BAR register (system software must allocate memory for it). Here, if there are other address space which is not associated with MSI-X, it must not share any naturally aligned 4-KB address range with either MSI-X Table or MSI-X PBA. \[spec- Dedicated BARs and Address Range Isolation\]

#### MSI-X Capability

PCIe Capability structures exist for several configurations including MSI-X. The Capability structures reside at a configuration space for PCIe and the system software may somehow access to this space. (You can refer the spec '7.2 PCI Express Configuration Mechanisms' for more details)

MSI-X Capability structure is as follow. It keeps *Table offset* field to point MSI-X Table, *PBA Offset* field to point MSI-X PBA, and *BIR* *(BAR Indicator register)* field to indicate which BAR. Note that the location of MSI-X Table and MSI-X PBA is determined by hardware, so the offset regions are read-only memory for software.

<div>

</div>

#### MSI-X Table

MSI-X Table keeps `Table size` number of entry. The system software reads `Table size` from Message Control register at MSI-X Capability structure, then fills the entry. Each entry contains (1) `message address` (2) `message data` (3) `vector control` field.

To request an interrupt, the hardware reads MSI-X Table for specific entry and writes `message data` to `message address`. The software can *mask* (which will be explained later) the entry using `vector control` field. Note that each table entry has `vector control` field, so if software wants to mask a specific vector, it needs to set all entries who use corresponding vector.

<div>

</div>

#### MSI-X PBA

PBA (Pending Bits Array) contains the function’s Pending Bits, one per each MSI-X Table entry. The pending bits are organized as a packed array of bits within QWORDs (8B). The pending bits are used to support *masking*.

<div>

</div>

## Masking

When a vector is maksed, the function is prohibited from sending the associated message, and the function must set the associated pending bit whenever the function would otherwise send the message. When software unmasks a vector whose associated pending bit is set, the function must schedule sending the associated message, and clears the pending bit as soon as the message has been sent.

<div>

<div>

:info:

</div>

<div>

atlassian-info

</div>

<div>

\#F4F5F7

</div>

<div>

Note that the software is permitted to mask a vector and service associated interrupt events strictly based on polling its pending bit.

</div>

</div>

There are two kinds of masking; (1) Function Masking (2) Per-Vector Masking (PVM). Function Mask can be set by writing `Function Mask` field at Message Control register (which is in MSI-X Capability structure). If function mask is set, all of the function’ss entries must behave as being masked. Per-Vector Masking can be set by writing `vector control` field at each MSI-X table entry.

## Synchronization

TBU (TMI?)

- event queue

- transaction ordering

- message receiver

## Summary

To summarize, you can refer followings for whole steps to make interrupt using MSI-X.

1.  Software enables MSI-X by writing MSI-X Enable bit

2.  Software reads MSI-X Capability and calculates MSI-X Table and MSI-X PBA location

3.  Software writes the interrupt vector information (i.e., address, data, control) for each MSI-X Table entry

4.  Hardware reads MSI-X Table

    1.  If a vector is masked, set corresponding pending bit

    2.  Otherwise, writes corresponding data to corresponding address (which is Memory Write transaction)
