# RDMA two-sided operation

<!-- id=32178307 parent=32178213 -->

RDMA two-sided operation is for traditional RPC-style (i.e., message-passing mechanism) communication. Message-oriented communication is cooperative: The receiver initiates the communication and specifies a location in its memory space that will be changed; then the sender determines what to change in the receiver's memory space and completes the data transfer.

RDMA Send and Receive are used in two-sided communication. Two-sided communication starts at the receiver: The receiver first posts an RDMA Receive Work Request (= Receive WQE) into the Receive Queue (= RQ) that points to a free memory buffer (

<div>

note that this doesn’t necessarily have to be registered as MR

</div>

, since the remote CPU clearly knows the location of buffer) . This free buffer will be used to store the data from a Send request. After the receiver has posted the RDMA Receive request, the sender then posts an RDMA Send Work Request to the Send Queue that points to the buffer (this also does not have to be an MR) to be transmitted. When the Send request is received, it will be matched and consume one Receive request. The application needs to ensure that there are sufficient Receive requests in the Receive Queue to match all incoming Send requests, else Send requests will be dropped.

Not only RDMA Send request is classified to two-sided operation, but one type of RDMA write request named

<div>

RDMA write with immediate request

</div>

can be also regarded as two-sided operation as it consumes the receive work request. RDMA write with immediate request includes an 4-byte “immediate value” (which is written to the receive completion entry) that can be used in further processing, in addition to the direct memory write executed on server-side RNIC. When writing with Immediate Data, the completion of the request will consume one RDMA Receive request in the receiver and generate a completion entry in the Completion Queue of the receiver. When writing with Immediate Data, the receiver cannot be passive, as it needs to post RDMA Receive requests and poll the Completion Queue to detect the completion of incoming data transfers.

Note that even the remote CPU is involved in RDMA processing, RDMA two-sided operation can show better performance compared to typical send/recv call as it offloads network stack into the hardware (as well as zero-copy feature).

Examples;

- RDMA send

- RDMA send with immediate

- RDMA send with invalidate

- **RDMA write with immediate**
