# RDMA Verbs (basic)

<!-- id=32178388 parent=32178213 -->

RDMA Verbs are the operations that RNIC will perform. You can think RDMA verbs as a semantic definition of RNIC interface.

Verbs are defined in Infiniband stack (so we usually call this as Infiniband verbs) - this includes both user-level definitions (=libibverbs) and kernel-level (included in linux sourcetree) definitions. Verbs not only include the APIs for data transfer, but also some control-path related tasks (e.g., create QP).

Both user-level software stack and kernel-level software stack defines RDMA verbs. Their naming are different for most cases, but usually they have same meaning. For instance, libibverbs defines `ibv_post_send` verb for posting WQE to the RNIC, while IB kernel module defines `ib_post_send` for same functionality. Note that user-level verb usually starts with prefix “*ibv”*, while kernel-level verb usually starts with prefix “*ib”.*

Below is abstracted version of RDMA architecture.

<div>

</div>

## User level driver vs Kernel level driver

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For high performance (by removing inefficient user-kernel context switching), RNIC usually support user-level driver. For the purpose, user-level driver has an authority to directly communicate with underlying RNIC (the BAR address is exposed to the user-level driver). Also, the user-level driver does not use “interrupt-based” completion; rather, they use more faster approaches such as polling.

There are no functional difference between user-level driver and kernel-level driver (essential SW stacks such as rdma cm is already implemented)

## Frequently used verbs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this section, we summarize frequently-used verbs and its behavior.

Below figure describes some representative verbs and how it is handled through SW stack.

<div>

</div>

We can classify verbs into two category: Control path verbs and Datapath verbs.

Control path verbs are verbs that create/manage RDMA specific metadata such as PD, QP, MR, and etc, while Datapath verbs are responsible for posting work request & polling completion. In general, control path verbs are assisted by kernel driver even related verbs are invoked in user space (e.g., ibv_reg_mr will eventually invoke some functions implemented in kernel driver). However, datapath verbs will bypass kernel since it will directly communicate with hardware.

Below are compiled list of verbs that are used commonly:

- **Control path verbs**

  - **ibv_open_device**

    - This function open the HCA (= RNIC) and create an userspace device context.

    - This function is usually invoked at the very first stage.

  - **ibv_alloc_pd**

    - This function creates a protection domain. Protection domain protects resources from arbitrary accesses from the remote side - for example, a given QP can only access MR which resides under the same PD. Therefore, it is done in prior to creating QP or MRs.

    - Components that can be associated with PD are:

      - Memory regions (MR)

      - Memory windows (MW)

        - This will be handled in another document. For now, you can think this as a fine-grained MR.

      - Queue pairs (QP)

      - Shared receive queues (SRQ)

      - Address handles (AH)

        - Refer to

          <div>

          <div>

          UD QPs

          </div>

          </div>

          for more detail.

      - **<span style="color: rgb(255,86,48);">Note that CQs are not in protection domain</span>**

  - **ibv_create_cq**

    - Creates completion queue, and this is a prerequisite step to create a queue pair.

  - **ibv_create_qp**

    - Create queue pair. For its argument, `struct ib_qp_init_attr` is passed. And this looks like:

    - <div>

      <div>

      struct ib_qp_init_attr

      </div>

      </div>

      - Here, pointer to send_cq, recv_cq, sq_sig_type, qp_type, qp_num are given.

        - These are the attributes you can define before the connection (to counterpart QP) stage

        - If you don’t know any of these, refer to

          <div>

          <div>

          RDMA metadata

          </div>

          </div>

          .

      - Also, there are `struct ib_qp_cap`, and it looks like (and its fields are straightforward):

      - <div>

        <div>

        struct ib_qp_cap

        </div>

        </div>

- **ibv_modify_qp**

  - This verb modifies the QP state and some attributes. Right after `ibv_create_qp`, the QP is in the RESET state - In order to use this QP as a communication channel, the QP need to transit its state to RTS (Ready-to-send) or RTR (Ready-to-receive) state. This can be done by establishing queue pair connection with another queue pair.

    - Below are state diagram of queue pair.  

      <div>

      </div>

    - If the QP is in RTR state, it can process “incoming” request, but you cannot post send WQE to this QP. (= This QP can only serve as a server-side)

    - If the QP is in RTS state, it can process both “incoming” request and posted send WQE. (= This QP can act as both client and server)

  - While connection establishment can be done through

    <div>

    <div>

    RDMA CM (Communication manager)

    </div>

    </div>

    or manually establishing connection using out-of-band protocol (e.g., TCP), the state transition itself is done by `ibv_modify_qp` verb.

  - In `ibv_modify_qp`, `struct ib_qp_attr` is passed. This structure contains:

    - <div>

      </div>

    - For each field, they might be updated in different stage. For example, `int qp_access_flags` might be updated in RESET → INIT transition, while `u32 rq_psn` will be updated in INIT → RESET transition.

    - To determine which field is updated in a given transition, additional parameter `int qp_attr_mask` is also passed in `ibv_modify_qp`. By masking this paramter, the driver notices which parameters are going to be updated. Below are typical example of when and what parameters are updated (and corresponding `qp_attr_mask)`.

      - RESET → INIT

        - `qp_attr_mask = IBV_QP_STATE | IBV_QP_PKEY_INDEX | IBV_QP_PORT | IBV_QP_ACCESS_FLAGS`

        - `qp_state, port_num, pkey_index, qp_access_flags` are updated.

      - INIT → RNR

        - `qp_attr_mask = IBV_QP_STATE | IBV_QP_AV | IBV_QP_PATH_MTU | IBV_QP_DEST_QPN | IBV_QP_RQ_PSN | IBV_QP_MAX_DEST_RD_ATOMIC | IBV_QP_MIN_RNR_TIMER`

        - `qp_state, ah_attr, path_mtu, dest_qp_num, rq_psn, max_dest_rd_atomic, min_rnr_timer` are be updated.

      - RNR → RTS

        - `qp_attr_mask = IBV_QP_STATE | IBV_QP_TIMEOUT | IBV_QP_RETRY_CNT | IBV_QP_RNR_RETRY | IBV_QP_SQ_PSN | IBV_QP_MAX_QP_RD_ATOMIC`

        - `qp_state, timeout, retry_cnt, rnr_retry, sq_psn, max_rd_atomic` are updated.

- **ibv_reg_mr**

  - This verb registers memory region. Memory region can be used as a memory buffer that can be directly accessed by RNIC in the following RDMA operation. If MR is not properly registered, the remote side will reject RDMA request due to permission error.

  - Note that once the remote side registers MR, the related information such as rkey or remote address should be somehow conveyed to the client side.

    <div>

    This can be done through (1) out-of-band protocol (e.g., TCP) or (2) RDMA one-sided operation.

    </div>

- **Datapath verbs**

  - ibv_post_send

  - ibv_post_recv

    - Above verbs post send (or receive) work request. The work request will be stored in the format of WQE, and will be passed to the hardware so it can process RDMA operation.

  - ibv_poll_cq

    - This verb polls the completion queue entry. Once the RDMA completion is arrived, the driver will complete corresponding RDMA request.

    - Note that polling is not the only way to detect RDMA completion. There is notification mechanism in RDMA (e.g., ibv_notify_cq) but usually polling enables faster detection since notification requires several context switching, process scheduling, etc.

      - If you are interested, you may refer to <a href="https://www.rdmamojo.com/2013/02/22/ibv_req_notify_cq/" data-card-appearance="inline">https://www.rdmamojo.com/2013/02/22/ibv_req_notify_cq/</a>.

At this point, it will be helpful if you can understand how above verbs are associated with RNIC microarchitecture. Below figure shows the typical RDMA NIC microarchitecture - what you have to understand in below figure is RNIC contains some sort of cache structure to store RDMA-specific metadata (e.g., QP, MR).

<div>

<div>

RDMA NIC microarchitecture.

</div>

</div>

Here, ICM cache stores QP context (you can think this is equivalent to QP attributes), MTT/MPT cache stores MR address translation table, and WQE cache stores in-flight RDMA requests for potential packet retransmission.

Here, you can easily guess:

- During `ibv_create_qp`, given QP attribute will be stored in ICM cache.

- During `ibv_reg_mr`, given MR information will be stored in MTT/MPT cache.

- During `ibv_post_send (or ibv_post_recv)`, send/recv WQE will be stored in WQE cache.

This is true, and our hardware is also following the similar way.
