# RDMA headers and header fields

<!-- id=32178321 parent=32178213 -->

## Introduction

------------------------------------------------------------------------

RDMA header includes various (RDMA-specific) information (such as destination QP number, remote keyt) that is used for RDMA operation. It is regarded as a payload in UDP perspective. Different RDMA operation (usually) has different combination of RDMA headers (e.g., RDMA write contains BTH + RETH header, while RDMA acknowledge has BTH +AETH header). Note that BTH header stands for base transport header - which means it is included in all type of RDMA payloads.

A single RDMA packet can contain payloads up to MTU bytes (here, MTU is configurable and the default size is 1KB). We are currently using static MTU value 1024. Whenever the total size of payload exceeds MTU size, it should be seperated to several RDMA packets; For instance, in case of 4KB RDMA write operation, it should be divided into four packets. Here, the four packets comprise one RDMA write first packet, two RDMA write middle packets, and one RDMA write last packet.

## BTH header (Base Transport Header)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BTH header contains fields always present in all RDMA packets. It is comprised of below fields.

<div>

<div>

Fields of BTH header (12 bytes)

</div>

</div>

- Opcode

  - Describes which operation this packet is for. You can find the opcodes in /include/rdma/ib_pack.h in linux source tree, or in this [LINK](https://mangoboost.atlassian.net/wiki/x/aIJhAQ).

- SE/M/Pad/Tver

  - Solicited (1bit)

    - This field is used when we want

      <div>

      responder

      </div>

      <div>

      to explicitly handle related tasks

      </div>

      with this packet. Generally, this bit is set for only/last packet of SEND, SEND_WITH_IMMEDIATE, SEND_WITH_INVALIDATE , and WRITE_WITH_IMMEDIATE operations. Once the responder detects the SE field is set for incoming packets, it shall invoke CQ event handler for further processing.

    - To implement notify_cq call, we should implement this field. This enables the notification mechanism changes from “Get notification for every CQE” to “Get notification only from CQE of the desired WQE (by calling

      <div>

      notify_cq

      </div>

      )”.

  - MigReq (1bit) - currently not used

  - Pad count (2bit)

    - By the specification, RDMA payload should be 4-byte aligned. Pad count indicated the number of padding bytes (0 to 3) that are append to the payload to make it be aligned.

  - Tver (4bit) - currently zero-filled

- Partition Key (currently using 0xffff)

- Reserved6 (currently zero-filled)

- Destination QP

  - Describes the QP number at the target side, which will be in charge of handling this RDMA packet.

- AckReq

  - This bit is used to indicate that the acknowledge (for this packet) should be scheduled by the responder. Usually the requester set the AckReq bit when the END_MASK is on for the packet. If the AckReq bit is not set, then the responder may infinitely coalesce the acknowledge packet.

- Reserved7 (currently zero-filled)

- PSN (Packet Sequence Number)

  - This field is used to identify the position of a packet within a sequence of packets. All IBA requesters shall generate a monotonically increasing (modulo 24) PSN when originating a packet. Depending upon the transport service type and / or implementation requirements, a responder validates the PSN to detect missing packets.

  - Note that psn field is one of the most important field in RDMA protocol - for instance, most of retranmission / duplicate packet handling operates based on this field

    <div>

    .

    </div>

  - <div>

    <div>

    PSN handling & retransmission of RDMA

    </div>

    </div>

## RETH header (RDMA Extended Transport Header)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

<div>

Fields of RETH header (16 bytes)

</div>

</div>

RETH contains the additional transport fields for RDMA read/write operations. RETH header is included RDMA read messages, as well as RDMA write only / first messages.

- Virtual address (remote address)

  - Start address of buffer (remote MR). It may start on any byte boundary.

- R_Key (remote key)

  - It acts as a protection key to access the specified memory address (and range) for a given operation. Note that this key must be exported to the requester to properly process RDMA request (if not the RDMA request will be rejected on target side)

- DMA Length

  - This field indicates the length (in bytes), of the remote DMA operation

## AETH header

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

<div>

Fields of AETH header (4 bytes)

</div>

</div>

AETH contains the additional transport fields for ACK packets. The AETH header is included in **all** ACK and the first, only, and last packet of RDMA read response messages.

- Syndrome

  - This field indicates whether this packet is ACK, or NACK (something got wrong).

  - If ACK and the QP type is RC transport, then the syndrome also provides the

    <div>

    Limit Sequence Number

    </div>

    (not implemented yet)

  - If NACK, it indicates the error code. For RNR-NAK, this field indicates the responder’s requested timer to be used before retransmitting the request.

- MSN (Message Sequence Number)

  - This is the sequence number of the last message (starts from zero) completed at the responder side. This field is used to optimize completion processing at the client side.

  - <div>

    <div>

    https://mangoboost.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/RT/pages/32211107/Details+of+MSN+field

    </div>

    </div>

<div>

<div>

Note that MSN field is a key field of our RDMA IP’s completer design. → This is no longer valid, since we removed ACK coalescing path.

</div>

</div>

## IETH header

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

<div>

Fields of IETH header (4 bytes)

</div>

</div>

IETH field is included in “send with invalidate” RDMA message. It includes the rkey of the MR that the responder uses to invalidate the memory region (which is registered at the responder side).

- R_Key: The rkey of MR to be deregistered

## IMMDT header (Immediate Extended Transport Header)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

<div>

Fields of IMMDT header (4 bytes)

</div>

</div>

Immediate Data (ImmDt) contains data that is placed in the receive (=responder side) Completion Queue Element (CQE). The ImmDt is only allowed in SEND or RDMA WRITE packets with Immediate Data (= SEND_WITH_IMMEDIATE or WRITE_WITH_IMMEDIATE)

## DETH header (Datagram Extended Transport Header)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

<div>

Fields of DETH header (8 bytes)

</div>

</div>

Datagram Extended Transport Header (DETH) contains the additional transport fields for reliable and unreliable datagram service (e.g., UD type QP).

- Queue Key

  - This field is required to authorize access to the destination queue. The responder compares this field with the destination’s QP Q_Key.

- Reserve (zero-filled)

- Source QP

  - This field specifies the source QP number. This field is used at the responder side to fill the destination QP number of response packets.

## ICRC

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ICRC is a 4-byte field which is attached at the very last portion (you can understand ICRC as a kind of footer) of the RDMA packet. RDMA internally uses crc32c algorithm to calculate the ICRC value.
