# Glossary & Overview

<!-- id=32178245 parent=32178213 -->

## Glosarry

------------------------------------------------------------------------

- <div>

  QP (Queue pair)

  </div>

  - <div>

    Indicates SQ and RQ

    </div>

  - This is the actual object that is responsible for communcation with remote node.

    - This is similar to “socket” in traditional network stack

- WQE (Work Queue Entry, pronounced as WOOKIE)

  - The data structure that is passed to the hardware; contains all necessary information to process RDMA operation (such as local buffer address, etc)

- MR (Memory region)

  - A pre-allocated memory buffer before the actual transfer. This is a “registered” memory area, so that the client can access the data within this MR without any server-side CPU intervention.

- CQ (Completion Queue)

  - This is where the completion queue entry resides. The driver can pop the entry from here and complete corresponding outstanding RDMA requests (or it can periodically poll the completion queue)

- CQE (Completion Queue Entry, pronounced as COOKIE)

  - The data structure that includes all information needed to complete a correspoding RDMA request (e.g., the corresponding request’s id)

- Initiator (or client)

  - The node that initiates the RDMA transaction (= the node that posts SEND WQE)

- Target (or server)

  - The node that is responsible for handling incoming RDMA “requests”

## Backgrounds

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RDMA overview

RDMA is a high bandwidth and low latency networking feature, which is widely adopted in modern datacenters. High performance of RDMA can be accomplished by allowing one machine to directly access data in remote machines across the network. Memory accesses are performed using dedicated hardware (=RNIC) without any CPU intervention or context switches, which decreases CPU usage on both the initiator and the target. When an application performs an RDMA read or write request, the application data is delivered directly to the network, reducing latency and enabling fast message transfer. RDMA also exhibits the concept of one-sided operations when the CPU at a target node is not notified of incoming RDMA requests. Several network architectures support RDMA: InfiniBand (IB), RDMA over Converged Ethernet (RoCE), and internet Wide Area RDMA Protocol (iWARP).

<div>

InfiniBand is a network architecture fully designed to enable reliable RDMA with its own hardware and protocol specification. RoCE is an extension to Ethernet to enable RDMA over an Ethernet network. Finally, iWARP is a protocol that allows using RDMA over TCP/IP.

</div>

### Queue Pairs and transport types

QP is a crucial building block in RDMA. This is a bi-directional message transport engines used to send (SQ is used) and receive data (RQ is used) in InfiniBand, and comprises Send Queue (SQ) and Receive Queue (RQ). Each QP endpoint has

<div>

a queue pair number (QPN)

</div>

assigned by the RNIC which uniquely identifies the QP within the RNIC.

QP has several kinds of transport each with different capabilities, and the most commonly used modes are reliable connection (RC) and unreliable datagram (UD). In production environments requiring high reliability, applications use RC mode to guarantee hardware-layer reliability. For RC transport type, endpoints of a single RC QP can only communicate with each other but not with any other QP in the same or any other target adapter. The RC transport uses several techniques to ensure reliability. First, the server-side RNIC must respond to each request packet with a positive acknowledge packet or a negative acknowledge packet. This acknowledgement-based protocol permits the requester to verify that all packets are delivered to the target. Also, to ensure the integrity of a packet, each packet contains two checksums that are verified by the target node. Finally, RC QPs maintain Packet Sequence Number (PSN) and expected Packet Sequence Number (ePSN), respectively, on the sender and the receiver. The purpose of PSN is to count received and sent packets (to enforce in-order delivery and detect duplicate and lost packets), and PSN is included in each packet. Specifically, RC QPs only receive packets with PSN correctly matching ePSN and increase ePSN after successful receiving. For RC, RNIC is responsible for retransmissions, where the receiver RNICs send acknowledge (ACK) packets. Once a packet is dropped, the sender must start retransmitting the lost packet. This means that the endpoints of a QP must know the PSN of each other, and this is guaranteed during

<div>

connection estabilishment process (= RDMA CM). You can refer to

</div>

<div>

<div>

RDMA CM (Communication manager)

</div>

</div>

for more detail.

### RDMA primitives and programming model

There are two well-known primitives in RDMA data transfer: two-sided (SEND/RECV) provides a message passing primitive (similar to traditional ethernet) while one-sided (READ/WRITE/ATOMIC) provides a remote memory abstraction—the RDMA-capable network card (RNIC) can directly read/write server memory in a server-side CPU-bypassing way. Although RDMA is commonly used in the user-space, the kernel adopts the same verbs API (verbs), which exposes network operations and connections as queue pairs (QPs).

RDMA programming model has quite a few abstracts and complex structures. To establish a connection, each side should first create a CQ, where the completion entry of a given work request resides. Then, each side should also create a QP, and associate the already created CQ with this QP.

Before connection establishment, a node should create a protected domain (PD) and then use this PD to register one or multiple memory regions (MR, which is a memory area that a client can access without server-side CPU intervention) with a unique remote key (rkey). Access to memory protected by MR is allowed only if rkey is correct.

Each RDMA operation requires to post a work request (WR) (or batch of requests) to the corresponding SQ. For the purpose, the CPU uses post_send (e.g., ib_post_send or ibv_post_send) verbs. Note that each SQ has a depth: the number of queuing WRs cannot exceed. In the two-sided mode, the receiver should pre-post a WR (which notifies the receive message buffers to RNIC) into its RQ via post_recv verbs (e.g., ib_post_recv or ibv_post_recv), then the sender posts a send request and indicates the buffer address of the payload. Finally, the receiver should

<div>

poll this RCQ

</div>

to ensure the arrival of the packet. After completing a RDMA operation, in most cases (=when the request is marked as a signaled), a completion queue entry (CQE) will be generated, and the completion can be polled from the CQ via poll_cq verbs (note that for the two-sided primitive, the CPU can further receive messages with poll_cq over the RQ).

In the one-sided mode, only the sender side needs to post a WR. However, the sender-side should indicate more information on the WR compared to two-sided cases. As one-sided operations inheritently involve the server-side MR, it should include the protection information of that MR and the remote buffer in the WR as well.

Additionally, both RDMA Write and Send support an extra immediate data which can notify receiver side immediately with an uint_32 data. Different from traditional socket programming, RDMA developers should indicate the source address, destination address, and transmission data size for communication. These memory regions have to be registered as RDMA-enabled memory. Both sides need to ensure RDMA-enabled memory is available until completion of the transmission. In conclusion, RDMA programs require a complex ritual: initializing context, registering memory, establishing connections, exchanging meta-data, creating QP, modifying QP to “ready to send/receive” and finally posting/polling WR/CQE. 

### More about protection mechanisms

The IBA protection mechanisms provide protection from unauthorized access to the local memory by network controllers. The local memory can also be protected against prohibited memory accesses. Three mechanisms exist to enforce memory access restrictions: Memory Regions, Protection Domains (PD), and Memory Windows.

To get access to host memory, the RNIC must first allocate a corresponding **memory region (MR)**. This process involves copying page table entries of the corresponding memory to the memory management unit of the RNIC. When a memory region is created, the RNIC generates keys for local and remote accesses, namely l_key and r_key. The memory region can be accessed by any local QP which has the l_key as long as they are in the same PD, and by their remote QP endpoints which have the r_key. The endpoints must prove the possession of this key by including it in every RDMA request, such as RDMA Write and Read. r_key is not used in any form of cryptographic computation, but rather is used as access tokens that are transmitted in plaintext.

**Protection Domain (PD)** provides protection from unauthorized or inadvertent use of memory regions. PDs group IB resources such as QP connections and memory regions that can work together: QP connections created in one PD cannot access memory regions allocated in another PD. In other words, a memory region can be accessed by any QP from its PD. All QPs and memory regions must have a PD and can be a member of one PD only.

**Memory windows** extend protection of memory regions by allowing remote QPs to have different access rights within a memory region and grant access to only a slice of the memory region.

## Good readings for new-comers

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>
