# RDMA metadata

<!-- id=32178259 parent=32178213 -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## About

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This document elaborates the RDMA metadata (e.g., QP, MR).

<div>

</div>

<div>

Before communicating over RDMA, one should create and initialize a Queue Pair (QP). A Queue Pair consists of a Send Queue (SQ) and a Receive Queue (RQ) and is associated with a Completion Queue (CQ).

</div>

The depth of these queues is limited by the hardware. Communication requires posting Work Requests (WRs) to the Queue Pair. Work Requests consist of a pointer to registered memory (usually an MR, but does not always have to be) and a request, where the type is determined by the work request opcode (= wr_opcode). Work Requests are processed asynchronously. When a Work Request is serviced, the RNIC populates the associated Completion Queue with a completion event. The application then retrieves completion events from the Completion Queue and reclaims the memory that each event points to.

Estimated reading time: 2 hours

## Queue Pair (QP)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can regard QP as an abstraction of RDMA connections (which is similiar concept with socket defined in linux network stack). It is the actual object that transfers the data (= responsible for scheduling some “works”), and consists of two queue named Send Queue (SQ) and Receive Queue (RQ) as described above.

### QP attribute

One can generate the QP with various configurations (which we also call as QP attributes) in order to make QP fit their application most. The configurations may depend on the application’s purpose.

The configurable attributes include (but not limited to. Just listing the QP attributes mainly used in our hardware..)

- **QP transport type**

  - RC (Reliable Connection)

    - RC type QP is connected to exactly one RC QP in a reliable way. It is guaranteed that messages are delivered from a requester to a responder at most once, in order and without corruption.

    - RC QP supports Send operations (w/o immediate), RDMA Write operations (w/o immediate), RDMA Read operations and Atomic operations (it depends on the RDMA device support level in atomic operations).

    - Requester considers a message operation complete once there is an ack from the responder side that the message was read/written to its memory. Meanwhile, responder considers a message operation complete once the message was read/written to its (local) memory.

  - UD (Unreliable Diagram)

    - UD type does not guarantee the messages will be delivered or about the order of packets (corrupted or out-of-order packets will be simply discarded, acknowledgement is not used in UD type QPs), but can be used in either unicast (one-to-one) or multicast (one-to-many) way.

    - UD type QPs only support SEND_ONLY and SEND_ONLY_WITH_IMMEDIATE packets.

    - General example includes the rdma_cm process (the process when we try to connect/disconnect between QPs through APIs such as rdma_connect, rdma_listen).

  - Other types such as UC or RD do exist, but we are not aware of this types at the moment.

  - *Digression: Which mechanisms are being used in RDMA to provide reliability?*

    - CRC: The field which validates that packets weren't corrupted along the path; Refer to ICRC section for more detail

    - PSN: The Packet Serial Number makes sure that packets are being received by the order. This helps detect missing packets and packet duplications.

    - Acknowledge: (only in RC QP) Only after a message is being written successfully on the responder side, an ack packet is being sent back to the requestor. If an ack isn't being sent by the requestor, it resend the message again according to the QP's attributes. If there won't be any ack (or nack) from a QP, it will report that there is an error (retry exceeded).  
      If there is any kind of error on the responder side (protection, resources, etc.) an ack will be sent to the requestor and it will report that there is an error.

- **Starting psn** (note that, this is our own-defined term)

  - Comprises sq_psn, and rq_psn (and these are official terms).

    <div>

    This is the agreement which both QPs made for the initial value of psn value for each direction. This value is set in rdma_cm process (or the user can assign it manually using out-of-band protocol).

    </div>

- **Destination QP number**

  - The remote QP number that is connected with this QP.

- **sq_sig_all**

  - WQE does not necessarily have to have corresponding CQE always. Instead, RDMA has the concept named “signaled”, which means only signaled WQEs will produce the corresponding CQEs into the associated CQ (more details will be added in WQE section).

    <div>

    Rather, we may configure the QP to be signaled - that is, any WQE posted in that QP will produce the corresponding CQE, whether WQE is signaled or not.

    </div>

- **max_send_sge**

  - The maximum number of scatter/gather elements in any “send” work request that can be posted to the queue in that queue pair. Currently our hardware use max_send_sge = 6 (updated. 2026-03-10)

- **max_recv_sge**

  - The maximum number of scatter/gather elements in any “recv” work request that can be posted to the queue in that queue pair. Currently our hardware use max_send_sge = max_recv_sge = 2, as the value should be minimal 2 to correctly support rdma_cm process.

- **max_send_wr**

  - The maximum number of outstanding work requests that can be posted to the send queue in that queue pair.

- **max_recv_wr**

  - The maximum number of outstanding work requests that can be posted to the recv queue in that queue pair.

- **MAX_INLINE_DATA**

  - Maximum size of the payload that can be inlined in a single WQE (not supported in our hardware). The memory for this data does not have to be registered. Note that this is an implementation extension, and not defined in any RDMA specification. Currently our hardware does not support this feature.

- **max_rd_atomic** (and **max_dest_rd_atomic**)

  - The number of RDMA reads & atomic operations outstanding at any time that can be handled by this QP as an initiator (or as an destination in case of max_dest_rd_atomic).

    <div>

    This field is relevant only for RC QPs.

    </div>

  - Note that If initiator tries to send more read (or atomic) operations than “max_dest_rd_atomic” , the remote side will send Invalid request NAK (we have experienced this case with MB (initiator) - CX5 (target) test; CX5 support up to 16 outstanding read request for all QP)

- **timeout**

  - The minimum timeout that a QP waits for ACK/NACK from remote QP before retransmitting the packet. The value zero is special value which means wait an infinite time for the ACK/NACK (useful for debugging). For any other value of *timeout*, the time calculation is: 4.096 \* 2^timeout usec (note that the default value for perftest is 14).

- **min_rnr_timer**

  - This field describes minimum RNR NAK timer field value. When an incoming message to this QP should consume a Work Request from the Receive Queue, but not receive work request is outstanding on that Queue, the QP will send an RNR NAK packet to the initiator. The initiator side will retransmit that message to the remote side after the time interval which is calculated by min_rnr_timer.

- **retry_cnt**

  - A 3 bits value of the total number of times that the QP will try to resend the packets before reporting an error because the remote side doesn't answer. The value 7 is special and specify to retry infinite times.

- **rnr_retry**

  - A 3 bits value of the total number of times that the QP will try to resend the packets when an RNR NACK was sent by the remote QP before reporting an error. The value 7 is special and specify to retry infinite times in case of RNR.

Above attributes can be passed to the hardware through various APIs, such as *ibv_create_qp* and *ibv_modify_qp*. For more details, you can refer to [https://www.rdmamojo.com/2013/01/12/ibv_modify_qp](https://www.rdmamojo.com/2013/01/12/ibv_modify_qp/) and [https://www.rdmamojo.com/2012/12/21/ibv_create_qp](https://www.rdmamojo.com/2012/12/21/ibv_create_qp/).

## Work Queue Entry (WQE) and Work Request (WR)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

WQE (pronounced WOOKIE), is an element stored in the workqueue. Meanwhile, WR (work request) is the request that is sent by the user to workqueue. So basically there are not too much differences between WQE and WR, and it is not a big deal even if you just regard they *conceptually* have no difference. (This wiki will also use both terms without much distinction.) In fact, there are some pre-defined structures (in linux source tree) for work request, such as `struct ib_send_wr` or `struct ib_recv_wr`. Meanwhile, WQE structure is vendor-specific; each RNIC vendor can define their own WQE format (which RNIC and its device driver already had an agreement). In this section, we will explain about the general fields in **work request** (WQE format will be explained in another document for our hardware architecture).

According to linux driver, work request includes below fields (but not limited to).

- **wr_id** (work request id) : Unique identifier assigned per work request. The corresponding work completion will contain this value (if work request is signaled so that the work completion is generated after work request completes)

- **wr_opcode**: The operation that this work request will perform (e.g., IB_WR_RDMA_READ). Refer to `enum ib_wr_opcode `for more details

- **sg_list** : Scatter-gather entry (= sge) that points the data buffer related to this work request. Let’s say, we submitted work request with opcode of IB_WR_RDMA_WRITE. Once RNIC receives this work request, it will trigger DMA read targeting this data buffers, and encapsulate them as an RDMA payload (If opcode is IB_WR_RDMA_READ, then RNIC will trigger DMA write to put the incoming payload into this buffer). Usually each scatter-gather entry is 4KB data buffer (page size). Note that generally all scatter-gather entries denoted in a single work request belong to same memory region, but it is doable to register each entries to different memory region.

- **num_sge**: number of sge used in this work request.

- **send_flags**: The flag describing the property of this work request. It is a bitwise OR of one or more of the following flags;

  - IB_SEND_SIGNALED

  - IB_SEND_SOLICITED

  - IB_SEND_INLINE

  - IB_SEND_FENCE

- **Lkey** (local key): The key value used for permission check in initiator-side RNIC. If the key does not match with the key value of any MR stored in the RNIC, RNIC does not perform DMA into the scatter-gather entry and produce an error work completion.

If the work request targets remote memory (e.g., RDMA READ or RDMA write), it additionally hold below metadata;

- 

  <div>

  Rkey

  </div>

  : the key value of the remote MR that this work request targets.

- **Remote address**: the address of the remote MR where this work request want to read (or write)

- **DMA length**: the length of data payload that this work request want to read (or write)

### Work request chaining

This is an optimization technique defined in RDMA specification, to remove the doorbell overhead. To do so, the work request structure has the pointer that points the “next” work request to process (kind of linked-list), and we call this “work request chaining”. When driver accepts a `ib_post_send` API, the driver not only reads the first work request but also "chained" request by pointer chasing, and put them into WQEs. Then the driver rings a single doorbell, and the hardware can fetch all those work requests with a single doorbell.

If you are interested in general optimization technique used in RDMA, refer to <a href="https://www.rdmamojo.com/2013/06/08/tips-and-tricks-to-optimize-your-rdma-code/" data-local-id="e9579ec2-9638-4fd1-b362-f1aec8bd9029" data-card-appearance="inline">https://www.rdmamojo.com/2013/06/08/tips-and-tricks-to-optimize-your-rdma-code/</a> .

## Completion Queue (CQ)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When an outstanding work request, within a send or receive Queue, is completed, a work completion is being added to the tail of CQ associated with that work queue. A work completion indicates that a work request in a work queue, and all of the outstanding unsignaled work requests that posted to that work queue (= work requests are completed in-order), associated with the CQ are done (and no longer outstanding), and provides details on it (status, direction, opcode, etc.). Any receive requests, signaled send requests and send requests that ended with an error will generate a work completion after their processing end. To fetch the work completion, the driver invokes `ib_poll_cq` to check if work completions are present in a CQ and pop them from the head of the CQ in the order they entered it.

<div>

Note that a single CQ can be shared for sending, receiving, and sharing across multiple QPs.

</div>

The work completion holds the information to specify the QP number and the queue (send or receive) that it came from.

The completion queue entry contains below fields:

- **wr_id**: work request id of the work request associated with this work completion

- **wc_status**: Status of the operation. This value indicates whether the work request is completed successfully or not. If not, the wc_status itself contains some information about the error cause.

- **wc_opcode**: The operation that the corresponding work request performed

- **byte_len**: The number of bytes transferred.

  <div>

  Relevant if the receive queue for incoming Send or RDMA Write with immediate operations. This value doesn't include the length of the immediate data, if such exists. Relevant in the Send Queue for RDMA Read and Atomic operations.

  </div>

- **imm_data**: A 32 bits number, in network order, in an SEND or RDMA WRITE opcodes that is being sent along with the payload to the remote side and placed in a Receive Work Completion and not in a remote memory buffer.

- **qp_num**: Local QP number of completed WR.

- **src_qp**: Source QP number (remote QP number) of completed WR. Relevant for receive work Completions of a UD QP (e.g., rdma_cm process)

- **wc_flags**: Flags of the Work Completion

## Memory Region (MR)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Every memory buffer that is being accessed by

<div>

the RDMA device needs to be registered

</div>

. During the registration process, the memory will be pinned (prevented from being swapped out), and the memory translation information (from virtual addresses to physical addresses) will be saved in the RDMA device. Also, during this registration process, two keys are also registered - one for local access and one for remote access. Those keys will be used when specifying those memory buffers in work requests, and RNIC will check the permission with this key.

We call this memory area with the relevent permission information as an MR (you can think MR as a wrapper structure). MR holds below information (but not limited,

<div>

To be updated

</div>

);

- Start address of memory buffers and their length (note that MR can include multiple scattered memory buffers)

- Permission keys (lkey, rkey) : Used in permission check which is done in the RNIC.

- <div>

  IOVA

  </div>

  - IOVA is virtual base address of the MR. With IOVA and the offset, RNIC translates into physical address with the memory translation information stored in RNIC.

- MR type (there are many types of MR, but we list the types currently supported in our hardware)

  - IB_MR_TYPE_USER

    - Indicates the MR that is registered in user space.

    - Posted WQE’s sg_list address will be VA. Need to translate before protection check.

  - IB_MR_TYPE_MEM_REG

    - <div>

      Indicates the MR that is registered in kernel space.

      </div>

    - Posted WQE’s sg_list address will be VA (kernel VA)

  - IB_MR_TYPE_DMA

    - This is used for the MR which is automatically registered when protection domain is allocated. We call the key of this MR as a local_dma_lkey. We can use local_dma_lkey value in the work request lkey field, when we want to use the buffer as a source (or destination) of data payload without registering it as an MR. Note that in our team, we often use the term “global_lkey” to specify local_dma_lkey field (although the naming is a little bit awkward )

    - Posted WQE’s sg_list address will be DMA address (PA). No need to translate before protection check.

- <div>

  Access flags

  </div>

  :
  - It describes the desired memory access attributes by the RDMA device. It is either zero or bitwise OR of one or more of below flags (there are more but below are the flags that are currently supported). Note that LOCAL_READ is always permitted.

    - IB_ACCESS_LOCAL_WRITE

    - IB_ACCESS_REMOTE_READ

    - IB_ACCESS_REMOTE_WRITE

- Protection domain information

  - For instance, local_dma_lkey is included (indicates which protection domain is associated with this MR)

Note that MR can be indexed with its *key value*; that is, the index of mr can be calculated by shifting the key with value 8. (i.e., `int mr_idx = rkey >> 8`)

## Protection Domain (PD)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Protection domain is an object whose components can interact with only each other. These components can be QP, MR, and SRQ. A protection domain is used to associate QPs with MRs and other metadata, as a means for enabling and controlling network adapter access to Host System memory. That is, a QP that belongs to PD1 can only access MRs which belong to the same PD (=PD1).
