# Details of MSN field

<!-- id=32211107 parent=32211017 -->

MSN field is included in AETH header, and it indicates how many messages are completed at the “responder” side. This value starts from zero, and increments by one per message.

Below are related specifications in IBTA Spec (refer to 1.4)

- C9-147: An HCA responder using Reliable Connection service shall return an MSN in the AETH of any response packet which contains an AETH.

- C9-148: An HCA responder using Reliable Connection service shall initialize its MSN value to zero. **The responder shall increment its MSN whenever it has successfully completed processing a new, valid request message**. The MSN shall not be incremented for duplicate requests. The incremented MSN shall be returned in the last or only packet of an RDMA READ or Atomic response. **For RDMA READ requests, the responder may increment its MSN after it has completed validating the request and before it has begun transmitting any of the requested data, and may return the incremented MSN in the AETH of the first response packet**. The MSN shall be incremented only once for any given request message.

  - This implies that the msn is increased in different way depending on the incoming request’s opcode (e.g., READ vs WRITE). Below figures describe this difference.

- C9-149: For an HCA responder using Reliable Connection service, the MSN counter shall be inserted in the AETH regardless of whether the response is a positive acknowledgment, a negative acknowledgment or a duplicate acknowledgment.

  - Note that the responder does not increase msn for duplicate packets (since MSN is incremented only once for a given request). Also, it does not roll-back the msn value for the duplicate requests - it always return the latest msn value.

<div>

<div>

For example, in case of rxe (=SoftRoce, which is a software implementation of RoCEv2 protocol in linux sourcetree), the responder increments the msn for WRITE/SEND request when the data write is done for the request packet with END_MASK (e.g., WRITE_ONLY, SEND_LAST). Meanwhile, for the RDMA read request, it increments the msn once the request is validated (e.g., rkey is validated, psn matches with the expected psn, etc).

</div>

</div>

## Examples

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Multi packet request (e.g., write 4K, send 4K, etc..)

<div>

</div>

Above figure describes the case for multi packet request, such as WRITE / SEND request whose payload size is larger than MTU (e.g., 1K for default). Here, we have one WRITE request, whose payload size is 2K so that it is splitted to two requests (each of them has psn value of 15, and 16 respectively).

Here we bring the concept of “SSN (Send Sequence Number)” for the ease of understanding, which indicates the sequence number of RDMA “requests” in the requester side (so in this figure, this RDMA request is the first RDMA request that requester transmitted). Note that SSN is just a logical concept, and not defined in IBTA specification.

With this assumption, the responder will send two acknowledge packets with psn 15, and 16 respectively. But we have to focus on how MSN field is incremented; as defined in C9-148, the MSN field is incremented only in a16 - since until a15, the request is not “completed” yet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. ACK coalescing

<div>

</div>

The next example shows when the acknowledge packets are coalesced (If you are not familiar with the concept of ACK coalescing, see

<div>

<div>

PSN handling & retransmission of RDMA

</div>

</div>

first).

Here, the requester sends 3 RDMA requests. Namely, each RDMA request’s SSN is 1, 2, 3, respectively. In this case, let’s say the responder chose to coalesce acknowledges - that is, a single ACK packet, denoted as a17 will acknowledge all three requests.

When the responder transmits the a17 packet, it signifies that all three requests have been successfully completed at the responder's side. Consequently, the "msn" field in the acknowledgment packet is updated to 3, reflecting the latest Sequence Number, indicating the completion of the third RDMA request.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. More complex scenario, when there are outstanding RDMA read (or atomic) requests

The situation become

<div>

slightly more complex

</div>

when there is an outstanding RDMA read / atomic requests.

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

Recall C9-148,

- **For RDMA READ requests, the responder may increment its MSN after it has completed validating the request and before it has begun transmitting any of the requested data, and may return the incremented MSN in the AETH of the first response packet**.

Therefore the read response packet’s MSN field may differ from its corresponding SSN value. For example, let’s say the responder decided to coalesce ACK packet for r1 and r2 with the read response of r3. Some might think that the MSN field of READ_RESPONSE_FIRST packet should be 2 (since r1 and r2 are completed, while r3 is not completed yet) - however, the possible value of MSN fields of READ_RESPONSE_FIRST packet are;

- MSN = 2

  - This is the case when r3 is validated, but the incremented value is not reflected in the msn field of first response packet (but still the r1 and r2 are completed, so msn should be 2)

- MSN = 3

  - This is the case when r3 is validated. According to C9-148, the incremented MSN value can be included in the first response packet.

- MSN = 4

  - This is when r6 is also completed. Since RDMA read must wait the payloads to be fetched, later packets can be also completed during waiting period (which means r6 is completed, therefore the msn value is 4). In this case, a3 with msn field 4 notifies the requester that responder have finished r1, r2, r3 and r6 as well.

<div>

<div>

Although it is not described in the figures or specifications,

<div>

the acknowledge packets should always have the msn value which is exactly same to the corresponding RDMA request’s SSN value

</div>

.

We verified this fact with the actual packet dumps - we used ConnectX-5 for the experiments.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. Simple example

Say, the requester sends three RDMA requests - each of which is RDMA read 1K, RDMA write 1K, and RDMA read 1K. And for simplicity, assume that each RDMA request has SSN value 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

Here, the possible MSN sequences are;

- \(1\) No coalescing:

  - READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 1)

  - ACKNOWLEDGE (msn = 2)

  - READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 3)

- \(2\) Coalescing case 1:

  - READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 2)

  - ACKNOWLEDGE (msn = 2)

  - READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 3)

- \(3\) Coalescing case 2:

  - READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 3)

  - READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 3)

<div>

<div>

Impossible case:

- READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 3)

- ACKNOWLEDGE (msn = 3)

- READ_RESPONSE_ONLY (msn = 3)

This shouldn’t be the case since ACK’s msn should have the exact same value with the corresponding SSN.

</div>

</div>
