# PSN handling & retransmission of RDMA

<!-- id=32211061 parent=32211017 -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## About

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This document describes the details of PSN handling and retransmission behavior of RDMA.

Specifically, we handle the below concepts (but not limited) here;

- Duplicate ACK handling

- NAK handling

  - PSN Sequence error NAK

  - RNR NAK (Receiver-Not-Ready NAK)

- ACK coalescing

- Implied NAK

- “PSN sequence error” driven retransmission (immediate retransmission)

- “Timeout” driven retransmission

  - Timeout interval

- Retry counter and retry counter exceeded error (unrecoverable)

Recap: PSNs are transmitted within the Base Transport Header (BTH) for all packets. They are used to detect missing or out-of-order packets, and, for reliable services, to relate a response packet to a given request packet. There is a relationship between the PSN on a requester’s send queue and the PSN on the responder’s corresponding receive queue. Thus, each half of a QP maintains an independent PSN; there is no relationship between the PSNs used on the Send queue and Receive queue of a given queue pair, or between different connections.

For example, say the initiator’s QP3 and the target’s QP4 are connected. Then, QP3’s RDMA request packet & QP4’s RDMA response packet have a relationship, and QP4’s RDMA request packet and QP3’s RDMA response packet have a relationship. Below is an example.

<div>

</div>

## PSN handling and packet loss

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

Ethernet is a lossy network, so we should not overlook the occurence of packet drop in RDMA (and in complex network like datacenters, it is normal to have a packet loss) . To cope with it, RDMA utilize the “psn” field to detect the packet loss and recover from it, as shown in below figures.

</div>

The first example shows when an RDMA request packet is lost in the network. Specifically, say the requester sent r1, r2, r3, and r2 is lost in the network.

<div>

</div>

Here, responder can detect the loss of r2 by extracting psn field from incoming requests (responder will first observe psn 1, and after psn1 it will observe psn 3, not psn 2, thus detecting the packet loss). This case is called “psn sequence error” (but don’t be afraid, this is a “recoverable” error). When psn sequence error is detected at the responder side, it “immediately” sends a NAK (with the syndrome value that indicates the occurence of psn sequence error) to the requester side (Note that acknowledge packet for r1 is omitted on the figure).

When requester receives the psn sequence error, then it will start retransmitting RDMA requests from r2 (it means, it will send r3 also). This is because RDMA protocol follows Go-back-N algorithm for retransmission.

The next example shows when the responder detects the **duplicate requests** due to timeout.

<div>

</div>

Here, we assume responder received r1 without loss, but the acknowledge packet a1 (which corresponds to r1) is lost in the network. In this case, the requester can detect the packet loss thanks to the **timer** at the requester side (the timer is assigned per QP, and expires when there is an in-flight request and the acknowledge packet does not arrive within pre-defined time interval). When timer expires, the requester performs retransmission process according to Go-back-N algorithm.  
  
In the above scenario described in the figure, the responder will detect the r1 twice. In this case, the responder regard this as “duplicate request”, since it already handled before in responder’s perspective. **The behavior of responder in this case is just re-sending the acknowledge packet (without any additional processing)**

<div>

<div>

However, the responder behaves differently in case of duplicate READ request. In fact, there is a QP attribute named `max_rd_atomic (or max_dest_rd_atomic)`, which indicates the maximum outstanding number of read (or atomic) request at any point (this value is set to 16 for ConnectX-5).  
Therefore, the responder side normally implements the data structure for storing metadata of latest read / atomic requests (

<div>

we denote this structure as

</div>

<div>

responder_resource

</div>

). This structure includes first/last psn of the corresponding read request, iova, dma length, etc. With the support of this structure, the responder checks if there is a match in one of those structures whenver the duplicate READ request comes in. If matches, then the responder re-fetch the corresponding payload from the host memory, generates RDMA read response packet, and send it back to requester.

<div>

If there is no match, then responder drops the incoming packet.

</div>

</div>

</div>

**In summary, the responder (and requester as well) has the “expected” psn value for the next packet, and it always compare this value with the psn field of incoming packet.** If they differ, then the responder (and requester) does some kind of exception handling process to maintain the order of RDMA packets.

## ACK coalescing and Implied NAK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In RDMA, it is not required to have discrete response packet for each request packet. Instead, the responder may acknowledge several outstanding requests with a **single acknowledge packet.** This is called

<div>

acknowledge coalescing

</div>

. Below are some related rules.

1.  <div>

    If there is an outstanding RDMA READ or ATOMIC Operation request with a PSN earlier than the PSN in the BTH of the response packet, then the response packet implies a negative acknowledgment (=

    </div>

    <div>

    implied NAK

    </div>

    <div>

    ) for the oldest such outstanding RDMA READ or ATOMIC Operation request. Any requests posted to the send queue subsequent to such an RDMA READ or ATOMIC Operation request are not acknowledged.

    </div>

2.  It implies a positive acknowledgment for all outstanding SEND or RDMA WRITE request packets with a PSN earlier than the PSN in the BTH of the response packet, unless such an outstanding SEND or RDMA WRITE request falls after an outstanding RDMA READ or ATOMIC Operation request as described above.

3.  <div>

    If the given response is an RDMA READ response message, it is the first (or only) packet of a RDMA READ response message that implicitly acknowledges prior outstanding requests.

    </div>

4.  <div>

    The last (or only) packet of a RDMA READ response message explicitly acknowledges only the RDMA READ request.

    </div>

Below is a simple example. Assume that r1, r2, r3 are either RDMA WRITE or RDMA SEND.

<div>

</div>

<div>

Here, for r2 and r3, the responder decided to coalesce responses with a single acknowledge packet a3

</div>

. After receiving a3, the requester will complete both r2 and r3.

However, the RDMA READ request requires the explicit, discrete RDMA read response since the requester need the payload. This situation is described in below figure.

<div>

</div>

Here, the responder decided to coalesce acknowledges for r1~r2 with a single read response (a3) and sent discrete acknowledge for r4 (=a4), but a3 is lost in the network. In this case, the requester will receive only a4. Then the requester will complete r1, r2 (as they are SEND requests), but it cannot complete the RDMA read request r3 because it need a payload. This is called an **implicit NAK**.

After implicit NAK is detected, the requester tries to retransmit requests starting from the failing request (=r3). Also note that the requester

<div>

will not complete r4

</div>

because RDMA transaction should be completed in-order (and the requester failed to complete r3).

Note that due to the relaxed ordering rules for RDMA READ Requests, the responder is permitted to begin executing one or more SEND or RDMA WRITE requests that arrive after the RDMA READ request

<div>

.

</div>

## Local ACK timeout and retransmission

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Local ACK timeout is an event that is only detected at the requester side. This event is triggered when the response packet for inflight request does not arrive at the requester side for predefined time interval (which is configurable with

<div>

QP attribute)

</div>

, so that the requester can decide to retransmit the packet.

For the purpose, RNIC implements a timer for detecting Local ACK timeout. This timer is allocated per QP, and the behavior of timer is;

- Start - whenever timer is not currently running and

  - \(1\) The requester sets the AckReq bit in a SEND or WRITE 

  - \(2\) The requester generates READ request or ATOMIC 

- Restart - when new inbound acknowledge packet is received as long as there are still outstanding expected responses

- Stop - whenever there are no outstanding expected response

When the timer count exceeds the QP’s `timeout` value, it expires and the requester is notified by the timer that Local ACK timeout is detected. After the detection, the requester retransmits all outstanding packets and decrement the `retry_cnt` value by one. Once retry_cnt becomes zero and the timer expiration has detected, the requester notifies host about retry_cnt_exceeded error. This counter value is re-initialized when new acknowledge packet arrives at requester side.

## RNR (Receiver-not-ready) NAK and related behavior

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unlike the one-sided RDMA operations (e.g., RDMA WRITE , RDMA READ), two-sided operation requires the remote side’s CPU intervention. That is, the responder must post the “receive” WQE before the SEND request arrives at the responder side. When this process fails (mainly due to performance gap of receive operation), the responder sends RNR (Receiver Not Ready) NAK back to the requester when there are no available receive WQE for the incoming two-sided RDMA requests.

<div>

<div>

Note that the occurence of RNR NAK does not necessarily mean that responder “will not” post receive WQE after RNR NAK. In most cases, responder will able to post receive WQE in the near future.

</div>

</div>

After the requester receives the RNR NAK, the requester waits for the time interval specified in the RNR NAK’s syndrome field (this timer value is configurable with QP attribute) for responder to be ready. Then the requester start retransmitting packets starting from the failed RDMA request due to the RNR NAK.

For the purpose, the RNIC generally implements another type of timer named RNR timer. It starts when RNR NAK arrives, and expires after the timer interval specified in the RNR NAK packet (so that the requester retransmits packet once timer is expired).

RNR timer also has retry counter (=`rnr_retry`), similar to Local ACK timer’s retry count. Every time RNR NAK arrives, rnr_retry value decrements by one. If new RNR NAK is detected when the rnr_retry value is zero, then requester notifies host about rnr retry count exceeded error. This counter value is re-initialized when new acknowledge packet arrives at requester side.
