# How to enable Adaptive Routing for CX.

<!-- id=397967495 parent=32080200 -->

This doc describes how to enable **AR(**adaptive routing) in CX.  
Adaptive Routing is supported on CX5 and later, with the required firmware version for each generation. It will be updated when this information as it becomes clearer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Normally, rdma write packets larger than the MTU size are fragmented into Write First, Middle, and Last. With AR enabled, all fragment packets are transmitted as Write Only.

To enable AR, you must enable the `adaptive_routing_forced_en` register value of the CX HCA to 0x1. You can check the current status as follows:

<div>

<div>

bash

</div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

\$ sudo mlxreg -d 57:00.0 --get --reg_name ROCE_ACCL Sending access register... Field Name \| Data ============================================================ ... adaptive_routing_forced_en_field_select \| 0x00000000 ... adaptive_routing_forced_en \| 0x00000000 ... ============================================================

</div>

</div>

*(I don't know the difference in mechanism between the two fields below, but from experience, AR works only when adaptive_routing_forced_en is enabled).*

These values can be changed using the mlxreg command. However, at this state, attempting to change the values using the command will have no effect.

To enable the `adaptvie_routing_forced_en register`, you must first enable the `ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN` environment variable. Please follow the steps below.

# Change the ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN env var.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

sudo mst start sudo mst status

</div>

</div>

Once MST is started, you can obtain the PCIe address mapped to the CX device and the MST device name using the mst status command.

Example output for mst status is as follows:

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

\$ sudo mst status MST modules: ------------ MST PCI module is not loaded MST PCI configuration module loaded MST devices: ------------ ... /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 - PCI configuration cycles access. domain:bus:dev.fn=0000:57:00.0 addr.reg=88 data.reg=92 cr_bar.gw_offset=-1 Chip revision is: 00

</div>

</div>

You can query the environment variables and values of the mst device via mlxconfig. The goal of the current procedure is to change the mst device's ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN (defaults: False) to True.

<div>

<div>

bash

</div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

sudo mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/{mst device path} -e q \# sudo mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 -e q

</div>

</div>

Since the list of environment variables is quite long, I will only show example output of the necessary parts.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

jaehyun.lee@smc13:~\$ sudo mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 -e q Device \#1: ---------- Device type: ConnectX6DX Name: MCX623105AC-VDA_Ax Description: ConnectX-6 Dx EN adapter card; 200GbE; Single-port QSFP56; PCIe 4.0 x16; Crypto and Secure Boot Device: /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 Configurations: Defautlt Current Next Boot ... \* ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN False(0) False(0) False(0)

</div>

</div>

Change `ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN` variable to True using the `mlxconfig` set command

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

sudo mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 set ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN=True Device \#1: ---------- Device type: ConnectX6DX Name: MCX623105AC-VDA_Ax Description: ConnectX-6 Dx EN adapter card; 200GbE; Single-port QSFP56; PCIe 4.0 x16; Crypto and Secure Boot Device: /dev/mst/mt4125_pciconf0 Configurations: Next Boot New ROCE_ADAPTIVE_ROUTING_EN False(0) True(1) Apply new Configuration? (y/n) \[n\] : y Applying... Done! -I- Please reboot machine to load new configurations.

</div>

</div>

Make sure Next boot is set to True and reboot. A warm boot is sufficient at this point.

After reboot, you can see that the only `adaptive_routing_forced_en_field_select` has changed to 0x1.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

Field Name \| Data ============================================================ ... adaptive_routing_forced_en_field_select \| 0x00000001 ... adaptive_routing_forced_en \| 0x00000000 ... ============================================================

</div>

</div>

# Change the adaptive_routing_forced_en register

Change the register value(`adaptive_routing_forced_en`) using the following command and check if the value has been changed properly.

<div>

<div>

wide

</div>

<div>

760

</div>

<div>

\$ sudo mlxreg -d 57:00.0 --reg_name ROCE_ACCL --set "adaptive_routing_forced_en=0x1" You are about to send access register: ROCE_ACCL with the following data: Field Name \| Data ============================================================ ... adaptive_routing_forced_en_field_select \| 0x00000001 ... adaptive_routing_forced_en \| 0x00000001 ... ============================================================ Do you want to continue ? (y/n) \[n\] : y Sending access register... --- \$ sudo mlxreg -d 57:00.0 --get --reg_name ROCE_ACCL Sending access register... Field Name \| Data ============================================================ ... adaptive_routing_forced_en_field_select \| 0x00000001 ... adaptive_routing_forced_en \| 0x00000001 ... ============================================================

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Please refer to the following page for how to dump roce packets.

<div>

<div>

RoCE packet dump using tcpdump

</div>

</div>
