# 0. Prepare the project (modified)

<!-- id=471040247 parent=471040007 -->

Before you start the project, you should build the initial version of the calculator engine. This version of the calculator engine is empty hardware used to load and test the driver; it does not perform any specific functions.

Follow the procedure below:

## 1. Open the Vivado program

We use Vivado 2023.2 version in this project. Add the following command in `.bashrc` and run `source .bashrc`.

<div>

<div>

source /tools/Xilinx/Vivado/2023.2/settings64.sh

</div>

</div>

Type `vivado` in any compute node’s shell. It is recommended to open Vivado via GUI to start working. You can use VNC server to run GUI (ask the senior).

## 2. Create a project

Click the “Create Project” Button.

<div>

</div>

Click “Next”.

<div>

</div>

Type the project name you want, then click “Next”.

<div>

</div>

Click “Next”.

<div>

</div>

In this project, we are using the U45N board. Search for “xcu26-vsva1365-2L-e” in the “Parts” tab, select it, and then click “Next”.

<div>

</div>

Click “Next”.

<div>

</div>

You should see a screen like this.

<div>

</div>

## 3. Create an initial version of the calculator engine

We usually use block design to facilitate easy hardware interconnections. Create a new block design by clicking the “Create Block Design” at the left tab. Specify the name of the block design and click “OK”.

<div>

</div>

In this project, the most critical module is QDMA. QDMA is a type of DMA engine provided by Xilinx as an IP. This module enables communication between software (SW) and hardware (HW) via the PCIe protocol. Click the “+” button, search for QDMA, and double-click it to add the module to the block design.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

QDMA configuration (error)

<div>

</div>

QDMA configuration (no error)

<div>

</div>

Vivado supports block automation. Click “Run Block Automation” at the top green bar. Click “OK”.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

QDMA requires some ports to be tied to one. Add “Constant” IP, and connect it like the diagram below.

<div>

</div>

Add BRAM to the block design, and connect it to the QDMA M_AXI_LITE port. You'll have to use this BRAM to work on the project. You should create a block design as below. If the M_AXI_LITE port is not exposed, disable it first and reactivate it.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

Click “Validate Design” button on the toolbar. It checks errors in the design and configures settings by inferring implicit configurations.

## 4. Create a bitstream

Before running the implementation, you should create an HDL wrapper. HDL wrapper is a Verilog file that represents (wraps) the input/output of the block design. Right-click your block design and click “Create HDL Wrapper”.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

To map the port of the block design to the pin on the FPGA, you should add constraint files. Create a new constraint file by clicking the “Add Sources” at the left tab. Create two constraint files: “general.xdc” and “pins.xdc” and click “Finish”.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

We will provide .xdc files for your convenience, but you should know that you must map the FPGA yourself if you are porting the FPGA for the first time.

##### general.xdc

<div>

<div>

\# \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* \# \# Copyright 2021 Xilinx, Inc. \# \# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); \# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. \# You may obtain a copy of the License at \# \# http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 \# \# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software \# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, \# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. \# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and \# limitations under the License. \# \# \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\* set_property CONFIG_VOLTAGE 1.8 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.CONFIGFALLBACK Enable \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.GENERAL.COMPRESS TRUE \[current_design\] set_property CONFIG_MODE SPIx4 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.SPI_BUSWIDTH 4 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.CONFIGRATE 63.8 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.EXTMASTERCCLK_EN disable \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.SPI_FALL_EDGE YES \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.UNUSEDPIN Pullup \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.SPI_32BIT_ADDR Yes \[current_design\] \# Manually connecting the Debug Hub clock pin to a valid clock source (100MHz reference clock in this case). \# Read AR72607 for details. \#set_property C_USER_SCAN_CHAIN 1 \[get_debug_cores dbg_hub\] \#connect_debug_port dbg_hub/clk \[get_nets ref_clk_100mhz\]

</div>

</div>

##### pins.xdc

<div>

<div>

set_property BITSTREAM.GENERAL.COMPRESS TRUE \[current_design\] set_property CONFIG_VOLTAGE 1.8 \[current_design\] set_property CFGBVS GND \[current_design\] set_property CONFIG_MODE SPIx4 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.SPI_BUSWIDTH 4 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.CONFIGRATE 72.9 \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.EXTMASTERCCLK_EN DISABLE \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.SPI_FALL_EDGE YES \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.UNUSEDPIN Pullup \[current_design\] set_property BITSTREAM.CONFIG.SPI_32BIT_ADDR Yes \[current_design\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AF7 \[get_ports diff_clock_rtl_0_clk_n\[0\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AF8 \[get_ports diff_clock_rtl_0_clk_p\[0\]\] create_clock -period 10.000 -name pcierefclk0 \[get_ports diff_clock_rtl_0_clk_p\[0\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AK18 \[get_ports reset_rtl_0\] set_property IOSTANDARD LVCMOS18 \[get_ports reset_rtl_0\] set_false_path -from \[get_ports reset_rtl_0\] set_input_delay 0.000 \[get_ports reset_rtl_0\] \#set num_ports \[llength \[get_ports qsfp_refclk_p\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN P8 \[get_ports qsfp_refclk_n\[0\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN P9 \[get_ports qsfp_refclk_p\[0\]\] \#create_clock -period 6.2070 -name qsfpclk0 \[get_ports qsfp_refclk_p\[0\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN J7 \[get_ports qsfp_txp\[0\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN J6 \[get_ports qsfp_txn\[0\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN H5 \[get_ports qsfp_txp\[1\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN H4 \[get_ports qsfp_txn\[1\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN G7 \[get_ports qsfp_txp\[2\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN G6 \[get_ports qsfp_txn\[2\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN F5 \[get_ports qsfp_txp\[3\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN F4 \[get_ports qsfp_txn\[3\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN K4 \[get_ports qsfp_rxp\[0\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN K3 \[get_ports qsfp_rxn\[0\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN J2 \[get_ports qsfp_rxp\[1\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN J1 \[get_ports qsfp_rxn\[1\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN G2 \[get_ports qsfp_rxp\[2\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN G1 \[get_ports qsfp_rxn\[2\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN E2 \[get_ports qsfp_rxp\[3\]\] \#set_property PACKAGE_PIN E1 \[get_ports qsfp_rxn\[3\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AF3 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[0\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AF4 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[0\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AG1 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[1\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AG2 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[1\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AJ1 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[2\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AJ2 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[2\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AK3 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[3\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AK4 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[3\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AL1 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[4\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AL2 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[4\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AM3 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[5\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AM4 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[5\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AN1 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[6\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AN2 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[6\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AR1 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxn\[7\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AR2 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_rxp\[7\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AD7 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[0\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AD8 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[0\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AE5 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[1\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AE6 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[1\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AG5 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[2\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AG6 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[2\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AH3 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[3\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AH4 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[3\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AJ5 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[4\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AJ6 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[4\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AL5 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[5\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AL6 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[5\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AN5 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[6\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AN6 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[6\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AP3 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txn\[7\]\] set_property PACKAGE_PIN AP4 \[get_ports pcie_7x_mgt_rtl_0_txp\[7\]\]

</div>

</div>

To create a bitstream, you need to go through three steps: “Synthesis”, “Implementation”, and “Write bitstream”. These three steps are done sequentially. You can run these steps by clicking “Run Synthesis”, “Run Implementation”, and “Generate Bitstream”. The overall progress will take about 30~40 minutes.

<div>

</div>

## 5. Export bitstream

After the bitstream is created, you can export the bitstream. Click “File-Export-Export Bitstream File…” to export your bitstream.

<div>

</div>

## 6. Program bitstream to FPGA

We provide a CLI tool to easily program bitstream. You can type the command below at the test server.

<div>

<div>

sudo mango-ctl vivado program 507711434H34A \<bitstream_name\>.bit

</div>

</div>

After programming the bitstream to the FPGA on the test server, you should reboot the server to properly recognize the PCIe device. You can do it as follows. Please check with the senior in advance if it is okay to reboot the server.

<div>

<div>

\# reboot the server sudo reboot \# after reboot, scan the pcie device sudo mango-ctl dev

</div>

</div>
