# FPGA Prototyping 101

<!-- id=471040007 parent=7012616 -->

# Introduction

In this project, you will develop full-stack prototype of FPGA-based arithmetic calculator. **After you finish this project, you would get following results.**

1.  User application that receives user input and delivers it to device driver.

2.  Device driver to manage user request and hardware.

3.  FPGA-based arithmetic calculator engine.

**This calculator operates through the following process.**

1.  User executes user application with two arguments, each corresponds to the arithmetic operands.

    <div>

    <div>

    ./my_calculator 13 21

    </div>

    </div>

2.  The user app passes the operands to the device driver.

3.  Device driver passes the operands to the calculator engine.

4.  Calculator engine calculates the sum of the two operands.

5.  Calculator engine sends the result to the device driver.

6.  Calculator engine sends interrupt to the device driver.

7.  Device driver outputs the result the moment it receives an interrupt.

**This project consists of following five stages.**

1.  Build a user application that receives user input and passes them to device driver.

2.  Build a device driver that passes operands to calculator engine.

3.  Design a calculator engine that calculates the result based on the input.

4.  Modify the calculator engine to send the result to the device driver.

5.  Modify the calculator engine and device driver to send/receive interrupt.

<div>

<div>

Project Overview

</div>

</div>
