# Falcon specification

<!-- id=52953427 parent=32080200 -->

My first impression: It is another intermediate protocol like RoCEv2. But not sure in which hierarchy it is..

There are many similar concept to RDMA - for instance, RETH header remains same.

== Introduction

Falcon is a “reliable transport” for RDMA operations and NVMe commands (no specification for this for now). In addition to high-level feature of RDMA (e.g., reliable transport), Falcon support (1) both ordered/unordered connection, (2) programmable congestion control engine that can be used to implement sota congestion control algorithms, and (3) PSP based authentication / encryption, which is done in per-connection manner.

=== Transport layer

Falcon only supports two type of operations - push / pull request. These requests can have up to MTU-size payload, and this enables flexible mapping from various ULP operations to Falcon operations (for instance, every RDMA requests can be mapped to push/pull). Also, Falcon transaction has its own ID named **RSN (Request Sequence Number), which is used for tracking the transaction state and ordering.**

=== Packet delivery layer

In packet delivery layer, (1) reliable packet delivery and (2) congestion control from a Falcon transmitter is supported.

<div>

</div>

There are “two” sliding windows to seperate out requests / data. The request sliding window is responsible for reliable delivery of Pull Requests, and the data sliding window is responsible for reliable delivery of Pull Data and Push Data.

The above figure illustrates the key concepts of the sliding window protocol that operates independently for most parts across the two windows. The transmitter assigns a Packet Sequence Number (PSN) to each packet in the range of 0 to 232 -1. The PSN is incremented by 1 for each packet transmitted and is included in the Falcon base header.

At the receiver, each packet has two states: received and acknowledged. Packet acknowledgment is tied to ULP acknowledgment and thus a received packet may not yet be acknowledged. The receiver conveys the received and acknowledged states of packets to the sender by sending an ACK packet. ACKs sent by the receiver contain an indication of the sequence numbers that have been successfully received. The receiver is permitted to use cumulative ACKs and can also piggyback ACKs onto packets flowing in the opposite direction. In the event of packet loss or reordering, the receiver sends Extended-ACK (EACK) which includes bitmaps of received/acknowledged PSNs, such that the sender can detect loss or reordering and retransmit lost packets.

At all times, the transmitter maintains a set of sequence numbers that it is permitted to send. These sequence numbers define a sliding window (shown by the gray box in the above figure). The left edge of the window is the Base Sequence Number (BSN) and represents the oldest packet sent that is yet to be acknowledged by the receiver. The right edge of the window is defined by the BSN + Tx Window Size. The transmitter is permitted to send a packet only if the PSN assigned to that packet falls within the transmitter’s sliding window. The Next Sequence Number (NSN) represents the next PSN value that must be assigned to the packet that is to be transmitted.

Connections are the simliar entity with the RDMA QP. The similiarity is that there are pair of CIDs -local CID as well as destination CID (which is included in Falcon header). The difference is that CID does not have a global significance - that is, the same CID can be used to communicate with different target. To disambiguate this, the client side uses a “locally” unique identifier named Source CID - but this is not exposed to the packet.

=== Error handling

Falcon supports the RNR retry “transparent to ULP”. Push transactions are retried from the initiator side, and Pull transactions are retried from the target side. In addition, Falcon supports a more graceful recovery with CIE - Complete in Error and continue semantic.

=== Example packet flow

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

- There are additional ACK packet for Falcon message itself..

<div>

</div>

- RNR NACK handling is entirely handled with Falcon → ULP layer implementation becomes simple since it can assume the reliable delivery is completely handled in Falcon

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

=== Packet format

<div>

</div>

All Falcon packets except ACK / NACK packets carry the Falcon base header.

- BACK (Base ACK)

- EACK (Extended ACK)

- NACK (Negative ACK)

=== RDMA over Falcon

<div>

</div>
