# Programmable congestion control communication scheme

<!-- id=75759859 parent=32080200 -->

This document summarize the patent from NVIDIA, which is relevant to PCC supported in ConnectX-6 devices or above. <a href="https://patents.google.com/patent/US20210152474A1/en" data-card-appearance="inline">https://patents.google.com/patent/US20210152474A1/en</a>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Below figure descirbes the overall diagram. Here, the network adapter that receives the data ( and receives congestion notifications) is referred as as a Notification Point (NP), and to the network adapter that sends the data (and may need to react to congestion notifications) as Reaction Point (RP).

<div>

</div>

Here, RP is responsible for adjusting packet injection rate, using the output from Congestion Management logic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The details of Congestion Management logic is described below. Fig 4A is for RP side, whereas Fig 4B is for NP side.

<div>

</div>

Below flow diagram does not necessarily mean the actual order of each flow. Basically, the flow diagram can be divided into three stages - (1) Fetching input, (2) Run CC algorithm, and (3) Sends CC messages for inputs used in next iteration.

\[RP side\]

- get TX event, which means some indication of packet TX in RP side - for example, if the TX pipeline sends burst of packets, then it can notify CC logic about this event.

- get RX event, which can include (but not limited to);

  - Received packets

    - ACKs, NACKs

    - CNP packets (defined in RoCE Congestion Management spec)

  - Returned RTT packets

    - If CC algorithm decides to use RTT information, TX pipeline at RP side will send RTT packet, and NP side will return this once it gets incoming RTT packet.

- get CC-MAD (typically originated from NP side), which is congestion control message (can be configured by user) following the MAD format (defined in IBTA specification).

  - **<span style="color: rgb(255,153,31);">CC-MAD is somewhat user can configure (used in programmable congestion control) ?</span>**

    - users of RNIC can define several CC-MAD types and insert special opcode in CC-MAD payload, to signal congestion control events between peer RNICs.

  - **<span style="color: rgb(255,153,31);">CC-MAD utilizes “QP 1”, which may have higher priority than other QPs.</span>**

  - The payload is limited to 256 byte.

  - User may use other packet format rather than CC-MAD, but in this case that packet will not have higher priority than others, and the security of such packets will not be checked by hardware.

- Send RTT, where RP side may send RTT packets to NP.

- Send CC-MAD, where RP side may send CC-MAD packets to NP <u>depending on the CC algorithm.</u>

\[NP side\]

- get RX event, which includes

  - ECN marked packet

  - Congestion notification from RX pipeline (when ingress packets being congested in RXT)

- get CC-MAD packets sent by RP

- Notify congestion, which NP may send CNP packet back to RP side or by other means.

- Send CC-MAD packets to RP, depending on the CC algorithm type.

Note that RTT can be handled in parallel. Once RTT is received, Congestion Management logic will add timestamps to the RTT and send the modified RTT back to RP side.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

</div>

Congestion management logic comprises two parts - CCC (Congestion Control Circuit) and a CC-RISC (Congetsion Control Reduced-Instruction-Set-Computer). Basically CCC is hardened logic and CC-RISC is firmware (= may comprises a commercially available RISC cores like RISC-V, ARM).

CCC is configured to receive congestion control inputs including congestion events and CC-packets, as well as does some sort of pre-processing (e.g., queueing CC events or colasecing events). But this does not necessarily mean both CCC and CC-RISC are required in embodiments. Some congestion control might be executed only with CCC (where CC-RISC is not required in this case), and for some embodiments entire CC algorithm can run only on CC-RISC.

- Pros and Cons

  - Running CC on dedicated HW

    - Tend to be rigid and hard to modify

  - Running CC on host processor

    - Typically exhibits long latency due to context switch

    - Consume significant CPU resource

    - Requires communication between host and RNIC via a PCIe bus

For RTT handling, NP side should return RTT to RP side, after recording its local time on the packet. This can be done in Congestion Management logic. However, some embodiments may have dedicated circuitry for RTT returning purpose.
