# Basic Background (until DCQCN)

<!-- id=76644729 parent=76644711 -->

<div>

<div>

<div>

This description may contains multiple errors and some of writing are just copied from the materials below since it’s clear. If you think something is unclear, please

<div>

comment

</div>

  
The followings are based on a few number of papers including

- DCQCN: Congestion Control for Large-Scale RDMA Deployments

  <div>

  <div>

  </div>

  </div>

- RDMA over Commodity Ethernet at Scale

  <div>

  <div>

  </div>

  </div>

- Data Center Transport Mechanisms: Congestion Control Theory and IEEE Standardization

  <div>

  <div>

  </div>

  </div>

After short descriptions, there can be `think time`, recommend pause yourself and imagine possible answers for a minute.  

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

is a slide version of above description

# **Data-Center Network**

<div>

<div>

Figure 1. An example of Data-Center Network around 2016

</div>

</div>

In general, datacenter network consists of multiple servers and switches and also the switches are in multiple hierarchy (or levels). Top of Rack switches (ToRs) are in between server nodes and leaf layer switches. Leaf layer switches connects spine layer switches and ToRs. Spine layer switches connects server nodes across the long distance. Importantly, all of those switches are build with IP and Ethernet technologies.

InfiniBand (IB), an efficient and high-performance RDMA protocol has been widely used in HPC domain. To enable such efficiency/high-performance on Ethernet based datacenter network, RoCEv2, which retains the IB transport layer, but replaces both IB networking layer (L3) with IP and UDP encapsulation and IB L2 with Ethernet, has been introduced.

Main difference in RoCEv2 (compared to IB) is that the Ethernet link layer (L2) does not provide lossless network (i.e, there can be packet drops if we continuously issue packets to the network!). As a result, PFC (priority-based flow control) has been introduced. The PFC allows an Ethernet switch to avoid buffer overflow by forcing a signal (“stop!”) to the immediate upstream entity (it can be either another switch or a host NIC) to pause data (or packet) transmission.

# **PFC (Priority-based Flow Control)**

- *What is PFC?*

  - RoCEv2 needs PFC to enable a drop-free Ethernet fabric. PFC prevents buffer overflow on Ethernet switches and NICs. The switches and NICs track ingress queues. When the queue exceeds a certain threshold, a PAUSE message is sent to the upstream entity. The uplink entity then stops sending on that link till it gets an RESUME message. PFC specifies upto eight

    <div>

    priority

    </div>

    classes. PAUSE/RESUME messages specify the priority class they apply to.

- *Why PFC is required in RDMA (in particular RoCEv2)?*

  - Unlike TCP, RDMA needs a lossless network; i.e. there must be no packet loss due to buffer overflow at the switches. RoCEv2 uses PFC (Priority-based Flow Control) for this purpose.

- *How the PFC works?*

<div>

</div>

– PFC is a hop-by-hop protocol between two Ethernet nodes. As show in Figure 2, the sender’s egress port sends data packets to the receiver’s ingress port. At the sending egress port, packets are queued in up to eight queues. Each queue maps to a priority. At the receiving ingress port, packets are buffered in corresponding ingress queues.

– Once the ingress queue length reaches a certain threshold (XOFF), the switch sends out a PFC pause frame to the corresponding upstream egress queue. After the egress queue receives the pause frame, it stops sending packets. A pause frame carries which priorities need to be paused and the pause duration. Once the ingress queue length falls below another threshold (XON), the switch sends a pause with zero duration to resume transmission. XOFF must be set conservatively to ensure that there is no buffer overflow, while XON needs be set to ensure that there is no buffer underflow.

– It takes some time for the pause frame to arrive at the upstream egress port, and for the switch to react to it. During this time, the upstream port will continue to transmit packets. Thus, the ingress port must reserve buffer space for each priority to absorb packets that arrive during this “gray period”. This reserved buffer is called headroom. The size of the headroom is decided by the MTUsize, the PFC reaction time of the egress port, and most importantly, the propagation delay between the sender and the receiver.  
  

- *What are the downsides (or limitations) of using PFC?*

  - `Coarse-grained solution:` Simply, it is coarse-grained solution, which blocks a port (shared interface for multiple flow (or packets)). Thus, it creates

    <div>

    unnecessary Head-of-Line (HOL) blocking

    </div>

    in both NIC and switches.

  - `Livelock (go-back-0):` Existence of a livelock has been studied when RDMA has been used. The key reason was because they use go-back-0 algorithm, which re-transmits all packets from the start point when they see any errors (not necessarily buffer overflow drop). Simple change was to make “go-back-N”, which re-transmits packets where N step back. But, this has also the limits and possibility of livelock, and it implies that there can be a better way to handle the errors well.

    - 

      <div>

      Can you think about an advanced solution ?

      </div>

  - `Deadlock:` based-on MS’16 SIGCOMM paper, a deadlock has been occurred when they use PFC pause frame. Main source of the deadlock was collaboration of PFC pause and broadcast packets to all other ports in “switch”. At this point, you’d better read the paper for details, but point is that PFC was not free from the deadlock.

    - *Can you think about a solution ?*

  - `PFC Storm:` a single PFC frame generates consecutive pause of all the networks. For example, if a single node cause PFC pause frame, the connected ToR switch pause all the ports and become a status of ‘paused’ and it also propagates Leaf switches to become the ‘pause’ and so on.

    - NIC (dest)→ ToR switch → Leaf switch → spine switch → Leaf switch → ToR switch → NIC (source)

      - all network becomes paused status

    - *Can you think about a solution ?*

- *What is PFC pause frame format?*

  Since PFC is 802.1Qbb standard, Ethernet Frame has the field

  <div>

  </div>

- *What is the difference between PFC and Congestion Control (CC)?*

  - The purpose of PFC is to guarantee lossless network since the lossless network provides high-performance and high-efficiency. To enable it, PFC is to give a signal to port like saying “you can’t transmit any packets to this port for a while”. On the other hand, the purpose of congestion control is literally control the \`congestion' itself and it does not mean that “you can’t transmit any packets”. The key difference between the two is in the granularity of control the packets.

    - 

      <div>

      Then, can we replace PFC by using congestion control?

      </div>

# **ECN (Explicit Congestion Notification)**

- *What is ECN?*

  - Literally, `A` (who detects congestion) let `them` (who can control the packet gen.) know the fact that there is congestion, which means \`\`need control” , explicitly by marking field in packets. Without using ECN, we should understand the existence of congestion in network `implicitly` (e.g, packet drops)

- *Why it is required?*

  - In my opinion, the `congestion` in network cannot be avoid easily. To take any action to control congestion in the network, we firstly need to know the existence of congestion `(i.e, detection)`. One of clear way is to `mark` the existence of congestion at the spot where the congestion has happened, and by using packet header (per packet) we can exploit this feature without modification of the infrastructure; we need to convey the `network congestion information` to the source; then, we can take `action to minimize` the network congestion.

- 

  <div>

  What type of ECNs are there?

  </div>

  - FECN (Forward Explicit Congestion Notification)

  - BECN (Backward Explicit Congestion Notification)

  - BTH of RDMA (this is specialized for Infiniband, RoCEv2 can use IP header fields for ECN-mark!)

    <div>

    </div>

- 

  <div>

  Do you know the limitations of using ECN?

  </div>

# **Basic Congestion Control Mechanism by looking at QCN (Quantized Congestion Notification)**

We can understand congestion control mechanism through famous algorithm called QCN. We don’t really deeply need to understand QCN, but should understand fundamental mechanism that they’d taken.

**QCN (Quantized Congestion Notification)**

- *What is QCN?*

  - Data Center Networks present a novel, unique and rich environment for algorithm development and deployment. Projects are underway in the IEEE 802.1 standards body, especially in the Data Center Bridging Task Group, to define new switched Ethernet functions for data center use. One such project is IEEE 802.1Qau, the Congestion Notification project, whose aim is to develop an Ethernet congestion control algorithm for hardware implementation. A major contribution of this paper is the description and analysis of the congestion control algorithm—QCN, for Quantized Congestion Notification— which has been developed for this purpose.

- *Why should we know QCN?*

  As we mentioned, we don’t really understand all of QCN, but understanding key working mechanism is important. so, it would be good to know common terminology of QCN algorithm

  - Components is perspective of congestion

    <div>

    <div>

    Figure 3

    </div>

    </div>

  - <u>Reaction Point (RP):</u> Where the rate of injection of a flow (or flows) is changed due to congestion signals

  - <u>Congestion Point (CP):</u> Where resources (buffers/links) exist and can be congested, and where congestion signals are generated

  - <u>Reflection Point (RefP) or Notification Point (NP)</u> : Where congestion signals are reflected back to the source

- *What steps are included in QCN Algorithm?*

  - **Overview:** Samples incoming packets and generates a feedback message addressed to the source of the sampled packet. The feedback message contains information about the extent of congestion at the CP.

  - **CP Algorithm:** The CP buffer is shown in Fig. 1. The goal of the CP is to maintain the buffer occupancy at a desired operating point, Qeq. The CP computes a congestion measure Fb (defined below) and, with a probability depending on the severity of congestion, randomly samples an incoming packet and sends the value of Fb in a feedback message to the source of the sampled packet. The value of Fb is quantized to 6 bits.

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

-  

  - **Rate limiter or Reaction Point (RP) Dynamics**: this is the mechanism by which a rate limiter (RL) associated with a source decreases its sending rate based on feedback received from the CP, and increases its rate voluntarily to recover lost bandwidth and probe for extra available bandwidth.

  - **RP Algorithm:** when RP receive negative Fb signals, it reduced injection rate of packets immediately, and continuously increase the rate. To do that, basically four is required

    - Current Rate, Target Rate, Byte counter, Timer

    <div>

    </div>

# **DCQCN (Data-Center ~~Quantized~~ Congestion Notification)**

To understand DCQCN, here is some points of view for importance.

- *What is DCQCN?*

  - Specialized congestion control technique for data-center network using RoCEv2. Basically, this is upon QCN algorithm; Thus, there are similar points, however, the reason why they introduce the DCQCN (i.e, not use/extend QCN) is clear.

- *What is difference between QCN and DCQCN?*

  - QCN cannot be used in IP-routed networks because the definition of a flow is based entirely on L2 addresses. In IP-routed networks the original Ethernet header is not preserved as the packet travels through the network. Thus a congested switch cannot determine the target to send the congestion  
    feedback to. We considered extending the QCN protocol to IP-routed networks. However, this is not trivial to implement. At minimum, extending QCN to IP-routed networks requires using the IP five-tuple as flow identifier, and adding IP and UDP headers to the congestion notification packet to enable it to reach the right destination. Implementing this requires hardware changes to both the NICs and the switches. Making changes to the switches is especially problematic, as the QCN functionality is deeply integrated into the ASICs. It usually takes months, if not years for ASIC vendors to implement, validate and release a new switch ASIC. Thus, updating the chip design was not an option for us.

- *What is key point of DCQCN in terms of algorithm?*

  - CP algorithm

    - if the Queue length of one of switch port exceeds a threshold value, ECN is marked

  - NP algorithm

    - For each QP, see FECN is marked or not and memorize CNP packet has been generated within N (= 50us) time  

      <div>

      </div>

  - RP Algorithm

    - Generate CNP packet

      <div>

      </div>

    - Reduce injection rate

      - How largely reduce the rate?

    - Recover injection rate of packets

      <div>

      </div>

      Wait K time, if there is no feedback (CNP), increase the injection rate again

      There are two way to do that (1) time-based (55us), (2) byte counter-based  
      ***Fast-Recovery → HyperIncrease → Additive Increase***

      <div>

      </div>

- *What is buffer settings and what they want to do?*  
  Threshold values of both ECN-marking and PFC pause depends on occupied buffer entries. What they want to do is to ensure that PFC pause frame is generated too early before the congestion control effects on network. They want to use PFC when congestion control does not show any positive effect

  <div>

  </div>

- *Buffer settings:*  
  As an example on switch, there are ingress (or input) ports and egress (or output) ports. Each ingress/egress ports have multiple queues. Those queues can be dedicated to each ports or can be shared among multiple ingress/egress ports, it depends on switch u-arch and it seems like the switch that supports PFC, also provides configuration of parameters of such thresholds

  <div>

  <div>

  An example of shared queue by multiple ports in switch

  </div>

  </div>

  - When PFC-signal is sent? → this really depends on ingress buffers

    - PFC pause frame must be sent after the ECN is triggered for all of the egress ports

  - When ECN-mark is added? → this really depends on egress buffers

    - We need to see the occupied number of egress buffers.

- Why they introduced Fluid model?

  - In addition to buffer settings, DCQCN should find optimal parameters that can provide optimal performance.

  - \(1\) probability of a packet getting marked at the bottleneck

  - \(2\) evolution of queue at the bottleneck

  - \(3\) the evolution of `amount of change of injection rate` at the RP

    <div>

    </div>

- *What is the limitation of DCQCN?*

  - Reducing the injection rate of packets is a way to control individual flows?

- *How can DCQCN be collaborated with PFC?*

  - *Can you find optimal collaborative parameters simply?*

**Additional questions!**

- *Why PFC depends on ingress queue?*

- *Why ECN is marked by watching egress queue in switch ?*

    

## **Current status (24.04.12) of RDMA IP for CC**

- *Rx_arbiter_in*

  - see this packet is CNP (to cnp handler) or ECN-marked (to ecn detector)

- *CNP handler*

  - What do now: generate completion to finish

  - What doesn’t do now: (this is assumed done by SW ! )

    - \(1\) injection rate control

    - \(2\) recovery mechanism

    - \(3\) PFC handling

- *ECN detector*

  - generate CNP packet (need to see works properly)

</div>

</div>

</div>
