# Infiniband Spec Comparison v1.7 w v1.4

<!-- id=77758684 parent=7012616 -->

## Non-RDMA Changes

- chap 7.6.10.3 Minimum Bandwidth

  - Traffic class on Infiniband which determine minimum bandwidth at infiniband layer

- chap 13

  - New MAD-related Compliance (C13-45.1.2)

  - smp check diagram modified (Figure 165)

    - **Class version** (New concept)

- chap 14

  - class version specification at subnet management class (infiniband layer)

## RDMA Changes

### Memory Placement Extensions (Annex A19)

- Extended Semantics gives RDMA operations global visibility and persistence

<div>

</div>

- Mainly, This extension handles about Data integrity when consecutive RDMA operations which occurred on same MR.

- 4 RDMA opcodes and 1 NAK added for this extension.

#### RDMA FLUSH Operation

FLUSH is used by requester to guarantee data placement on memory subsystem done. Flush Operation needs to contain RETH to get Rkey. So, Flush Packets are like as below.

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

FLUSH Extended Transport Header (FETH) contains two fields, Selectivity Level and Placement Type. Flush Operation could be done at specific range of single MR or entire range of single MR. b’00 at SEL field means this FLUSH operation check range of Memory Region. Range of operations are determined by DMA length field in RETH. b’01 at SEL Field means this operation check entire range of MR. Placement Type(PLT) defines dma guarantee of this Flush. Bit 0 means Global Visibility and Bit 1 means Persistence.

Flush operation is always a single packet and response packet is like zero byte RDMA read response.

<div>

</div>

Like picture above, FLUSH response should be sent after three RDMA writes' DMA done. At base specification (without Annex), RDMA acknowledge does not mean DMA done. To guarantee DMA done at single MR, FLUSH operation used.

#### ATOMIC WRITE operation

Like other atomic operations, responder should guarantee ATOMIC WRITE’s atomicity. But there’s no AtomicETH at ATOMIC WRITE. There’s only RETH, and payload should be 8byte. Responder send zero byte RDMA READ’s response to requester.

#### VERIFY COMPUTE / VERIFY CHECK Operations

To guarantee data integrity of MR which have consecutive access, there’s two new RDMA operations. Like other new operations, VERIFY operations need hash type MR. Which means Requester and responder should communicate about hashing type of specific MR. VERIFY operations have BTH with opcode GET(newly added at v1.7) and EOETH(newly added header for GET and PUT operations). EOETH header specifications are as below.

<div>

</div>

At VERIFY COMPUTE operation, packets are like as below.

<div>

</div>

Using MR’s information of RETH, responder calculate hash of MR(or range of MR) and send it back using READ RESPONSE. If VERIFY_COMPUTE failed, operational error NAK occured.

VERIFY_CHECK operation is similar with VERIFY_COMPUTE operation, but it contains expected hash value of MR like below.

<div>

</div>

Responder checks local hash and Payload’s one, and if there is some difference, it sends operational error NAK.

Example of VERIFY COMPUTE is as below.

<div>

</div>

VERIFY operations are seem to have atomicity at specific MR. But It will spend lot of time if check range is long. So, Responder sends **Operation in Progress** NAK to requester, which notifies that operations is in progress to prevent false timeout of QP.

### NETWORK PROBE (Annex A20)

Using MAD packet’s class, they specified new class, **the Network Probe class** and packets are like as below.

<div>

</div>

NP_Key are used to validate the source of Network Probe MADs. NPMgr of each nodes manage set NP_KEYs. There’s new methods of Management Class to use Network Probe.

<div>

</div>

There are some types of attribute of this class, but most important one is RTTProbe. There are two kinds of RTTProbe, RTTProbe32 and RTTProbe64. Difference between two is the bitwidth of timestamp. RTTProbe64 packet is like as below.

<div>

</div>

Opaque Data is used to distinguish Packets. Whe requester sends RTTProbe64 packet, responder receives this packet and marks receive time and response send time in scale of nanosecond. Two time fields are used to calculate delay of responder.

### Additional Notes about Multicast Congestion Control

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

### Automatic Path Migration (A17.4.10)

- refers chap 17.2.8 (in Spec 1.4 too). It was originally supported by infiniband, but at v1.7, RoCE (both v1 and v2) supports Automatic Path Migration

  - Using MigReq Field at bth, End-to-end qps change fabric to recover from bad path or load balance.
