# HPCC

<!-- id=80216498 parent=76644711 -->

The main purpose of the following summary of congestion control series is to share the key concept and key implementation design point with team members. Feel free to interrupt when you see any unclear moment. I recommend to skim the following text and if you want to deep dive in, you’d better to read paper.

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

# **“HPCC (High-Precision Congestion Control) – SIGCOMM’19 by Alibaba”**

***What they do? (a high-level)***

As you see, HPCC stands for High-Precision Congestion Control, it implies previous congestion control mechanism such as DC-QCN and TIMELY has limitations since they depend on inaccurate or indirect information. If you remember, DC-QCN uses ECN/CNP packet and it just let us know the existence of congestion for a specific flow (e.g, QP 7). They said precise information provides multiple benefits in comparison to DC-QCN/TIMELY.

Following paragraphs are some selected part of their motivation (which I think important or informative):

- Unfortunately, after operating large-scale RoCEv2 networks for years, we found that RDMA networks face fundamental challenges to reconcile `low latency`, `high bandwidth utilization`, and `high stability`.

- `Case-1: PFC (priority flow control) storms.`

  - A cloud storage (test) cluster with RDMA once encountered a network-wide, large amplitude traffic drop due to a long-lasting PFC storm. This was triggered by a large incast event together with a vendor bug which caused the switch to keep sending PFC pause frames indefinitely. Because incast events and congestion are the norm in this type of cluster, and we are not sure whether there will be other vendor bugs that create PFC storms, we decided to try our best to prevent any PFC pauses. Therefore, we tuned the CC algorithm to reduce rates quickly and increase rates conservatively to avoid triggering PFC pauses. We did get fewer PFC pauses (lower risk), but the average  
    link utilization in the network was very low (higher cost).

- `Case-2: Surprisingly long latency.`

  - A machine learning (ML) application complained about \> 100us average latency for short messages; its expectation was a tail latency of \< 50μs with RDMA.

<!-- -->

- `Why they introduced new CC mechanism, why they don’t just use DC-QCN with optimal parameter tuning?`

  - Essentially, as the first generation of CC for RDMA designed more than 5 years ago, DC-QCN has several design issues due to the limitations of hardware when it was proposed, which results in the challenges to network operations. For instance, DC-QCN’s **timer-based scheduling** inherently creates the trade-off between `throughput (more aggressive timers)` and `stability (less aggressive timers)`, while its ECN (queue) based congestion signaling directly results in the trade-off between `latency (lower ECN thresholds)` and `bandwidth (higher ECN thresholds)`. Other than the preceding two trade-offs, the timer-based scheduling can also trigger traffic oscillations during link failures; the queue-based feedback also creates a new trade-off between ECN threshold and PFC threshold.

  - Detailed limitation of DC-QCN is as follows:

    - `PFC limitations:` because DC-QCN uses PFC as a final control line of congestion control, DC-QCN inherently contains unexpected network problems such as PFC deadlock and PFC Storm.

    - `Slow convergence:` With coarse-grained feedback signals, such as ECN or RTT, current CC schemes do not know exactly how much to increase or decrease sending rates. Therefore, they use  
      heuristics to guess the rate updates and try to iteratively converge to a stable rate distribution.

    - `Unavoidable packet queueing:` A DCQCN sender leverages the one-bit ECN mark to judge the risk of congestion, and a TIMELY sender uses the increase of RTT to detect congestion. Therefore,  
      the sender starts to reduce flow rates only after a queue builds up. These built-up queues can significantly increase the network latency,

    - `Complicated parameter tuning:` Operators usually face a complex and time-consuming parameter tuning stage in daily RDMA network operations, which significantly increases the risk of incorrect settings that cause instability or poor performance

***What is a baseline they use?***

- We use the latest production-ready version of RoCEv2: DCQCN is used as the congestion control (CC) solution which is integrated into hardware by RDMA NIC vendors. PFC is enabled in NICs and switches for lossless network requirements. The strategy to recover from packet loss is “go-back-N”

***What is their goal?***

- \(i\) latency should be as low as possible

- \(ii\) bandwidth/utilization should be as high as possible

- \(iii\) congestion and PFC pauses should be as few as possible

- \(iv\) the operational complexity should be as low as possible.

Among the above four objectives, I would like to emphasis the 4th one. One of the papers strong motivation seems like the operation complexity. We don’t really feel this situation since we don’t provide any service through large-scale data-center system, but it might be true that they must test before they really launch the parameters of DC-QCN algorithm to check a new parameter create destroy of the system or not. To build that, they requires not only additional test-bed system (~16 nodes), and also testing time. So, I also agree the deploying DC-QCN with optimal parameters are not simple work.

## ***How HPCC work?***

<div>

</div>

A solution they propose is using In-Network Telemetry (INT) based on the idea of “let’s get obtain precise information from the switch (or link)”. To do that, they use a metric named `sending window`. Sending window means in-flight transferred bytes (e.g, amount of data) for a flow in NIC. Note that, this is different from the sending rate (or injection rate) as the DC-QCN use. This description only explores qualitative way, if you really want to understand quantitatively of HPCC algorithm, you’d better see the paper :)

- *What is in-network telemetry (INT)?*

  - In-network telemetry is `monitoring technology` used to remotely collect data from switch (or network). It can contains multiple parameters related in the network (or switch). For example, with INT, a sender can know exactly the loads of the links along a flow’s path from an ACK packet, which facilitates the sender to make accurate flow rate adjustments

  - In-network telemetry vs ECN-mark

    - Can you imagine what will be better if you use INT compared to ECN-marked packets? If you can feel right away without any specific example, you don’t need to think about it. Generally, I believe more information is more better when we communicate each other since additional information gives clear solution. One concern of this is overhead of getting the information, if we require ~x100 data compared to simple ECN-mark (1bit), that probably does not make sense for performance.

- *In-flight bytes (HPCC) vs injection rate (DC-QCN)*

  - Senders limit in-flight bytes with sending windows. Key difference is in whether they stop issuing packets to the network or continuously issuing the packets. When we continuously issue packet to network, congestion increase is somewhat obvious and also when we stop issuing packets to the network at some point, it basically don’t increase the congestion. However, the question here is that how can we properly stop issuing packets? HPCC utilize in-flight bytes (i.e, size of total data). How this approach guarantee that this is secure metric?

- *Key Two Differences of HPCC mechanism from the DC-QCN has adopt!*

  - `Count in-flight bytes:` for a link (or port)

    - 

    - In-flight of a link is measured using In-network Telemetry (queue length, txBytes)

      - 

  - `Fast converge and Overreaction:` Combine RTT-based and ACK-based

    - 

## **Implementation details**

<div>

</div>

*Which telemetry is used in?*

- Meta-data that reports the current load of the packet’s egress port, including timestamp (ts), queue length (qLen), transmitted bytes (txBytes), and the link bandwidth capacity (B).

The packet format of the INT padding after UDP header and before IB BTH (Base Transport Header) as in RoCEv2 standard.

- `nHop:` nHop is the hop count of the packet’s path. Each switch along the path adds nHop by 1, and XORs  
  its own switch ID to the pathID.

- `pathID:` is the XOR of all the switch IDs (which are 12 bits) along the path. The sender uses pathID to judge whether the path of the flow has been hanged. If so, it throws away the existing status records of the flow and builds up new records.

- `B:` is a enum type which indicates the speed type of the port

- `timestamp (TS):` Timer value of a switch (or link)

- `txBytes`: total bytes sent so far (in units of 128 Bytes)

- `qLen`: the queue length ( in units of 80 Bytes) are all standard INT information.

*Hardware implementation in NIC*

Not to omit papers description in HW detail, I would like to copy this part from the paper

<div>

</div>

`The Congestion Control (CC) module:`

- implements the sender side CC algorithm. It receives ACK events which are generated from the RX pipeline, adjusts the sending window and rate, and stores the new sending window and rate for the flow of the current ACK in the flow scheduler via an Update event.

`The flow scheduler:`

- paces flow rates with a credit-based mechanism. Specifically, it scans through all the flows in a round-robin manner and assigns credit to each flow proportional to its current pacing rate. It also maintains the current sending window size and unacknowledged packets for active flows. If a flow has accumulated sufficient credits to send one packet and the flow’s sending window permits, the flow scheduler invokes a PktSend event to TX pipe.

`The TX pipe:`

- implements IB/UDP/IP stacks for running in RoCEv2. It maintains the flow context for each of concurrent flows, including 5-tuples, the packet sequence number (PSN), destination QP (queue pair), etc. Once it receives the PktSend event with QP ID from the flow scheduler, it generates the corresponding packet  
  and delivers to the MAC module.

`The RX pipe:`

- parses the incoming packets from the MAC module and generates multiple events to other HPCC modules. (1) On receiving a data packet, the RX pipe extracts its flow context and invokes a PktRecv event to the TX pipe to formulate a corresponding ACK packet. If the packet is out-of-sequence (OOS), the TX pipe sends a NAK instead. (2) On receiving an ACK packet, the RX pipe extracts the network status from the packet and passes it to the CC module via the flow scheduler. (3) On receiving a NAK, the RX pipe  
  notifies the TX pipe to start go-back-to-N retransmission. (4) On receiving a control packet with an RDMA operation, the RX pipe notifies the flow scheduler to create a flow with a new QP ID, or remove an existing flow. Currently, HPCC supports two operations: RDMA WRITE and RDMA READ. We leave the full support of IB verbs as future work.

## **Evaluation environment**

`Testbed experiment`

The testbed includes one Agg switch and four ToRs (ToR1-ToR4) connected via four 100Gbps links. There are 32 servers in total and each server has two 25Gbps NICs. 16 servers are connected to ToR1 and ToR2 via two uplinks, and the other 16 servers are connected to ToR3 and ToR4. The base RTT is 5.4μs within a rack and 8.5μs cross racks.

- Micro-benchmarks

- End-to-end performance

`Simulation experiment`

The topology in the NS3 simulations is a FatTree \[7\]. There are 16 Core switches, 20 Agg switches, 20 ToRs and 320 servers (16 in each rack), and each server has a single 100Gbps NIC connected to a single ToR. The capacity of each link between Core and Agg switches, Agg switches and ToRs are all 400Gbps. All links have  
a 1μs propagation delay, which gives a 12μs maximum base RTT. The switch buffer size is 32MB which is derived from real device configurations. The whole network is a single RDMA domain.

- HPCC is beneficial to short flows

- Throughput for long flows

- CC is the key to achieve stability and high performance

## **Result and Discussions**

Always, there is no perfect method, so we need to think about limitation of HPCC. I don’t believe HPCC is the one king solution.

- If you agree with it. Why HPCC is not perfect?
