# RDMA atomic operation

<!-- id=93880360 parent=32211017 -->

Background: We found out that we need to support atomic operation in order to pass compliance test. Also, it looks like MPI is somehow using RDMA operation (which is used in interoperability test) - so we must take a look on atomic operation, and implement it on our hardware.

===

**What is atomic operation?**

- <div>

  The operation that performs “64-bit' operation (= read-modify-write) on data fetched from specified address.

  </div>

**What does atomic mean?**

- It should block other QP in the same RNIC accessing the same address, before RMW finishes.

**How it looks like?**

- Two new packet format: Atomic command packet & atomic response packet.

- Atomic ETH header

  - 64 bit remote_address, 32 bit rkey, 64 bit swap_add data (used for both opcode), 64 bit compare data (only used for CmpSwp operation)

- AtomicAck ETH header

  - 64 bit original data (which is originally fetched in read stage from RMW)

**Brief explanation of about atomic operations:**

- Use same virtual address semantic, just like RDMA read or write.

- No immdt data supported

- VA contained in AtomicETH header should be 8-byte aligned - If not, responder need to return the Invalid Request NAK.

- It is strongly recommended to support atomicity within the hardware

  - Question: How to implement?

  - Older-generation NICs (e.g., ConnectX-4) use a proprietary concurrency control mechanism to implement atomics, resulting in higher latencies than later generations that rely on PCIe atomic transactions. (Reference: <https://www.usenix.org/system/files/nsdi22spring_prepub_reda.pdf>)

  - If you look at ConnectX-6 VPI specification, it says it supports PCIe atomics.

  - But still, it seems QDMA does not support PCIE atomics

  - Lower level IP such as <a href="https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg213-pcie4-ultrascale-plus/Overview?tocId=8KS4EE_UoIo8LEmmToMVRA" data-card-appearance="inline">https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/pg213-pcie4-ultrascale-plus/Overview?tocId=8KS4EE_UoIo8LEmmToMVRA</a> seems to support atomic.

**Types of atomic operation and its feature**

- Fetch and add

  - \(1\) Read 64-bit value from remote_address, (2) perform unsigned 64 bit add operation with swap_add data, and (3) write the calculated result back to remote_address

  - CMD contains remote address, rkey, write data

  - ACK contains the original remote data (big endian)

- Compare and swap

  - \(1\) Read 64-bit value from remote_address, (2) compare with compare data field, and (3) (if match) write swap_add data back to remote_address

  - Command: contain remote address, rkey, swap data, compare data

  - ACK: Contain original remote data (big endian)

**Details (copied from specification)**

- <div>

  If an RDMA READ work request is posted before an ATOMIC Operation work request then the atomic may execute its remote memory operations before the previous RDMA READ has read its data.

  </div>

  This can occur because the responder is allowed to delay execution of the RDMA READ. Strict ordering can be assured by posting the ATOMIC Operation work request with the fence modifier. See the description for the fence modifier Post Send Request. The fence modifier causes the requestor to wait till the RDMA READ completes before issuing the ATOMIC Operation.
  - Due to loosely ordered READ, one may specify “fence” modified to the Atomic operation WQE, to ensure the data ordering.

- When a sequence of requests arrives at a QP, the ATOMIC Operation only accesses memory after prior (non-RDMA READ) requests access memory and before subsequent requests access memory. Since the responder takes time to issue the response to the atomic request, and this response takes more time to reach the requestor and even more time for the requestor to create a completion queue entry, requests after the atomic may access the responders memory before the requestor writes the completion queue entry for the ATOMIC Operation request.

  - Memory access ordering is ensured among non-RDMA read requests.

- Each ATOMIC Operation request requires an explicit response and acknowledge message. An ATOMIC Operation response, with a properly formed AETH, is considered an acknowledge message.

  - Just like READ response, atomic operation requires explicit response packet.

- When an ATOMIC Operation is retried, the responder does not validate the R_Key nor does it translate the virtual address in the retried request.

  - Difference between READ vs ATOMIC, in terms of duplicate request handling.

  - <div>

    </div>

  - <div>

    </div>

  - **For duplicate ATOMIC request, it only checks psn range**

  - **Our HW should be modified - now responder_resource structure should include result of atomic operation, for retried ones (maybe we can reuse VA field)**

    - Return original data (outcome of RMW) back to the sender in case of duplicate atomic

  - Atomic operation shares max_outstanding with read (-o option)

==== About MPIs ===

**What kind of atomic operations are used in MPI?**

- There are many atomic operations like fetch_and_op (op = OR, AND, SUB, etc..) and compare_and_swap

- **These are emulated with RDMA, by only using fetch_and_add + compare_and_swap**

  - MLNX_OFED uses MCA_BTL_ATOMIC_SUPPORTS_ADD \| MCA_BTL_ATOMIC_SUPPORTS_CSWAP as atomic_flag → It means CX only supports above two, and others are emulated

- If you look at (ompi/mca/osc/rdma/osc_rdma_component.c), then below code checks the requirement.

- <div>

  </div>

- **What is remote completion? What should be changed?**

  - Remote completion vs local completion : remote completion indicates remote operation is finished → but what is remote operation?

  - It seems like it is naturally guaranteed when we use RDMA

- What is the difference between non-RDMA-based vs RDMA-based MPI? (Below answer is from ChatGPT)

  - If we use RDMA, then we may consider using `Win_flush_local` rather than `Win_flush`.

  - **MPI_Win_flush_local:**

    - `MPI_Win_flush_local` ensures completion of all local operations associated with a specified MPI window on a target process.

    - This function ensures that all local operations, including local writes or RDMA operations, that were issued on the target process and are associated with the MPI window have completed. It does not necessarily ensure completion of remote operations.

    - This function provides a local completion guarantee, meaning it ensures that local operations have been completed locally but does not necessarily wait for remote operations to complete.

  - **MPI_Win_flush:**

    - `MPI_Win_flush` ensures completion of all outstanding operations, both local and remote, associated with a specified MPI window on a target process.

    - This function ensures that all local operations issued on the calling process and all remote operations issued on the target process that are associated with the MPI window have completed. It provides a global completion guarantee, ensuring that both local and remote operations have been completed.

    - `MPI_Win_flush` is typically used when the calling process needs to ensure completion of both its own operations and the operations of the target process.

**Note that OpenMPI codes are included in OFED.**

- You can see fetch_and_add are linked to btl_atomic_fop (opal/mca/btl/openib)

- Operations includeing READ, WRITE, SEND, SEND_WITH_IMM, FETCH_AND_ADD, COMPARE_AND_SWAP are used in OpenMPI

  - For example, GET operation is implemented using RDMA read, PUT is implemented using RDMA write, etc

  - Not sure about why SEND / SEND_WITH_IMM are used for what purpose - need to dig in more.

<div>

<div>

Note that BTL (byte transfer layer) is no longer supported in recent version of OpenMPI (\>5.x). Rather, RoCE transport is supported by UCX (it is also included in OFED package) - <a href="https://openucx.readthedocs.io/en/master/index.html" data-card-appearance="inline">https://openucx.readthedocs.io/en/master/index.html</a> (but not sure whether interoperability test use BTL or PML)

Refer to <https://www.infinibandta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/IB-Interop-Testing-MOI-2019-10-09.pdf> for more detail.

</div>

</div>

If you want to look at more at MPI, then check

<div>

<div>

MPI backgrounds

</div>

</div>

.
