# Standard DB

<!-- id=959283330 parent=130744832 -->

You can refer to the official documentation here -

<div>

<div>

Standard DB Guide

</div>

</div>

### Overview

This documentation summarizes the current status, future plan, and some required information of our IP’s **temporal** Standard DB design. The term “temporal” means that we do not follow the standard of above guide yet, since it needs any kind of IP design fix; it is now just a preperation stage to keep track of both 100G and 200G designs.

### Status Quo

The 200G development branch has been rebased into the latest dev branch and fully verified. Now under peer review. The 100G development branch has been verified only with the version before rebase.

### Future Development Plan

- Waiting for peer review to merge 200G design into dev.

- After all major BD changes merge into dev, I will work with 200G → 100G BD conversion to create dev_100G branch as well.

- After 100G / 200G separation, both dev and dev_100G branch will be synchronously managed until we have design fix.

### Key Takeaway: Separated Branches but Unified IP Source Code

The ultimate purpose of Standard DB is to make easier version management. One common way to achieve this is to generate minimal version-dependent files as possible. In RDMA branch, such variations lie on RTL (\*.v, \*.sv files), BD (some tcl files), flavor definition, and some scripts. Thanks to the \#ifdef statement depending on the flavor, we could unify one source code per module which is responsible for both 100G and 200G designs. So our goal is maintain everything to be always identical between two branches except the version-dependent things mentioned above.

Instead of using a single branch where two version-dependent files included in it, I chose a scheme of multiple branches which only differ at those dependent things. This is because of the productivity overhead; HLS re-synthesises for version swap take HUGE amount of the time. So there will be two dev branches, namely `dev` and `dev_100G`.

### Flavor-Sensitive Module List

Only the followoing modules have two versions of RTL depending on the flavor. The total number of the modules is 25.

- **c2h_subsystem (3)** - `c2h_desc_data_mux`, `interrupt_handler`, `write_desc_manager`

- **congestion_control (3)** - `cc_handler`, `ccmad_handler`, `cnp_generator`

- **control_plane (2)** - `requester_frontend`, `responder_frontend`

- **data_plane (6)** - `loopback_switch`, `rdma_loopback_dropper`, `rdma_traffic_counter`, `rx_arbiter_in`, `rx_tcp_arbiter`, `tx_arbiter_in`

  - **backend (5)** - `crc`, `ect_checksum_setter`, `merger`, `requester_backend`, `responder_backend`

  - **writer (3)** - `comp_payload_dropper`, `resp_payload_dropper`, `writer`

- **h2c_subsystem (3)** - `fetch_engine`, `h2c_payload_arbiter`, `h2c_payload_divider`

Or you can find the same list at the following directory in our repo: `RDMA/scripts/flavor/flavor_sensitive_list.txt`

### Development Guideline

- **IP / RTL update**

  - 1\. Clone both `dev` and `dev_100G` branches. Apply source code updates on dev branch and,

  - 2-1. For the modules included in the above flavor-sensitive list, copy all the changed source code files from `dev` to `dev_100G` and run HLS for each branch, respectively. (**important - make sure to do** `rm MODULE_NAME.pmap` **before HLS**)

  - 2-2. Otherwise, run HLS once only in dev and copy the entire module folder from `dev` to `dev_100G`.

- **BD update**

  - 1\. Clone both `dev` and `dev_100G` branches. Make VCS or project for each branch, respectively. You can use the same command for both branches. (i.e. `-bw 200g` even at `dev_100G` branch)

  - 2\. Open two vivado GUIs and manually apply BD changes for both branches. The usage of `make tcl` remains unchanged for `dev_100G` branch. (Maybe later this could be automated by script, but not yet…)

### Test Guideline

For now, 100G design is not included in our essential test list. So basically testing with what we’ve done so far is enough. However, if you changed flavor-specific part of the flavor-specific module described above (e.g. inside `#ifdef FULL_WIDTH`), then it is highly recommended to run VCS or VMG on `dev_100G` branch at least.
